This is Jockel Podcast number 220 with echo Charles and me, Jockel Willing. Good evening echo. Good evening.
Three hours passed by slowly and the terrible news had been heralded by the few frustrated medical staff members walking out of the tent stressed out.
Three of the wounded did not make it. And the word was passed that it was time for us to perform our job and the sinking feeling and the pit of my belly fell into the sea.
We tripped over ourselves trying to get up several of our Marines volunteered as litter bearers and several of us quickly cleared our sleeping area to make room for the processing.
Our sleeping area was out in the open and people who were passing by could see in through the camo netting. So a couple of our Marines were signed to each end to ensure that discretion was maintained.
The only sounds that could be heard were the not so distant generator and the swaying of the camo netting in the light breeze.
In earnest under incandescent lights watching our fellow M.A. Marines carrying the remains of our fallen brothers in and lowered them on to the sandy floor of our sleeping area.
It was out of reverence that no one spoke.
The sound of a heavy zipper being opened on each bag was deafening.
And the confused emotions began to whirl inside my soul.
The female chaplain assigned to the STP followed the procession in and watched our Marines begin the processing.
And she leaned over to whisper to one of our teammates.
You guys have a very tough job.
Very tough.
The first was a Hispanic staff sergeant who was assigned to a tank battalion and it succumbed to his wounds sustained in a firefight outside of Baghdad.
The second was a Caucasian Lance Corporal, the same one who three hours prior, I had helped carry off the helicopter.
His fingers were still wrenched together just as he had done earlier as he arrived in pain and the tracks of his tears were still visible.
When the zipper of the third bag was undone, it revealed an individual whose whole head had been bandaged and thick bloody gauze.
I thought to myself, how can that guy breathe through all that gauze?
Then it dawned on me and I felt stupid.
He was dead.
And the medical staff had bandaged his head to keep all the pieces in.
One by one the paperwork was filled out. The personal effects were catalogued and the transportation was arranged to take our fallen south to Kuwait.
We had completed our work, but there was still something missing.
We wanted to do more for these guys.
Someone had asked the chaplain to lead us in prayer and she did.
So under the glow of the incandescent lights and swaying camo netting, all 23 of us stood in a circle around our brothers and bowed our heads in solemn prayer.
I felt bad to know that a world away from here, the families of these men were praying that those who lay before us were safe that night.
And it ripped out my heart to know the truth.
I hope that God could provide them comfort and strengthen the terrible news, traveled to meet them unaware.
The chaplain quietly notes in front of each stretcher and performed a last-right prayer according to each of their individual denominations.
And she put the sign of the cross on their foreheads with ash and it meant the world to meet a witness it.
Our volunteers transported their remains to the flight line to be evacuated out of Iraq and to Kuwait by C130 Hercules cargo plane.
From there they would be placed inside an aluminum mobile coffin called a transfer case. And an American flag would be placed onto it before they would chase the son across the globe and land in the United States.
It was a tough night. The first time I had ever seen deceased servicemen.
And as much as I had prepared myself mentally and physically for the job, I had never prepared myself emotionally.
I kept thinking about those guys. The scenes kept playing over and over in my head.
I felt terrible for them and for their families.
What a huge loss.
I couldn't sleep. So I sat on a broken piece of concrete, stared off into nothing and smoked my cigarettes down to the filter all alone.
And that is an excerpt from a book called No Tuffer Duty, No Greater Honor by Gunnery Sergeant L. Christian Bustler.
And you've heard me say before that the nature of war is death.
It's one of the things I said when I retired from the Navy.
And I get it that there are an infinite number of other dynamics in war.
There's strategy and tactics. There's manpower and logistics. There's hearts and minds.
There's technology and weapons. There's leadership. There's human nature. And the list goes on and on.
But one thing is always present in war.
And that is death.
But death does not end on the battlefield.
And in fact, the finality of one life and combat unleashes a chain of events that profoundly and forever impacts countless
other lives.
It impacts the members of a unit, the unit who lost their comrades in arms, who still must carry on with their mission.
And that's an incredibly heavy impact.
But on top of that and even heavier it impacts the mothers and fathers and the husband's wives and the sons and daughters.
The families and friends of the fallen death has a monumental impact.
And in war, those of us who are in it experience death more than normal civilians do.
Most of us from the military have been more funerals and memorial services than we care to remember.
And depending on your specific job inside the military, you may experience death more or less often.
If you're an infantry soldier, then you're going to experience more death than a supply curve.
But there's one military job that deals with death more than any other.
And that is mortuary affairs.
Those military members who are charged with handling our fallen service members.
And that was Gunnery Sergeant Bustler's duty.
And as the title of the book indicates, there is no tougher duty.
And there is no greater honor than ensuring our heroic service members who have given their last full measure.
Our sent home with as much care and respect and honor as they deserve.
And it is an honor to have Gunny Bustler here with us now to share some of his experiences.
What he saw, what he went through and what he learned.
Gunny.
Thanks for coming on, honey.
Thank you so much for having me. It is a deep and profound honor to be able to sit here at this table with you guys.
And bring to light an MOS that's very not well-known.
And to bring the light to different sacrifices of the guys who did this job.
And as I was writing the part I was thinking about the fact that who deals the most with death.
And obviously you think of an infantry soldier.
You know, you're going to see a lot of it.
And then I thought about medical.
Obviously the medics, the corpsmen, the doctors, the surgeons that are out there.
They're going to see a ton of it too.
But the big difference is they get to see the other side of the spectrum.
There's even people's lives. There's someone that they can pull through.
And I would only think that that would counteract the difference between being in more to wary of fairs.
Where you don't see any of that.
There's nothing motivating to do with our job.
Because if you work in the medical field, you do your best and ensure that guy will get home.
And have a normal life.
You've read it with the grunts, you know, train, train, train, try to prepare yourself.
But for us, we never know where we're going to get until we open the bag.
And then we have to wear so many different hats. The, you know, between processing remains.
And then we're dealing with and working with there.
They're unit members and taking, you know, their statements.
And so you have to play the role of a like a funeral director and the.
And it's so hard to remove yourself from that.
Because you may recognize that person you're working on from the, the child hall.
Or you know that guy, you know, and that had to happen to us several times.
And that's where it really, really sucks.
So let's, let's start off and figure out how you got there.
Okay.
So you were born where, you know, high on.
Oh, I was born in Mount Holly, New Jersey.
Okay.
And your dad was a event he was Air Force. Okay.
I grew up in the Air Force, traveled all over the world.
I spent 70 years in Japan.
When we left there, we went and visited some friends over in Clark Air Force base over in.
In Philippines, New big bay went back to Thailand.
So how old are you at these times?
Wow.
So your dad was in the Air Force.
You were a kid.
You were going to your station to Japan.
You were traveling around. You were a military brat.
Yes.
As they call, I thought everybody was that.
You know, I thought everybody, to be an American, you had to be the military.
And I had no idea that there was a civilian world until I came back when we were 10 years old.
And we moved straight into South Carolina.
And I'm like, wow, there's actually people who don't, you know, run and work out.
And what was your job?
What was your dad's job?
I was a force.
Yeah.
He was a P.O.L. so he refueled airplanes. He spent three tours in the Vietnam War where he met married my mom.
But back then he was making, you know, he said he used to make Napalm and stuff like that.
And your mom's tie.
Yep.
Yeah.
They met married.
She immigrated here.
Had had me and my two brothers.
Yep.
And so where'd you do your growing up?
So when you moved back to the States, where'd you move to?
We moved South Carolina for like three or four years.
Then we moved to Illinois for a year.
Then we moved to Ohio.
My dad found a job as a contractor at Wright Patterson Air Force Base.
He was there for a few years.
They lost the contract during the Clinton years.
And then he got a job as a mailman.
And I went to high school out there, graduated.
And that's what led me to joining the reserves.
The Marine reserves because I traveled as a kid.
And I never had friends beyond three years, four years.
And I didn't want that.
I finally had a place where I had low, you know, I loved my hanging out with my friends.
And so after I joined the reserves, they were like, hey,
So how'd you pick the Marine Corps?
Because I grew up in the Air Force.
And we would always watch the War movies,
cartoon and you know, and full metal jacket and we're like, oh man, that's awesome.
How cool would it be to go shoot a 50 cow?
I don't know.
It would be to, you know, this shoot them 16s all day long.
And you know, and, and, and, and,
But I just want your dad think when you're doing the Marine Corps.
He didn't like it.
Mm-hmm.
Was he didn't like the Marine Corps?
Did he not like anything?
Or was it just, hey, I did this or you don't have to.
No, it was.
He knew that it was something I wanted to do.
But he was very cautious about it.
He said, I, when I was a kid, when I was over in Vietnam in Thailand,
I remember seeing a lot of those body bags getting loaded up on the helicopters and the planes.
And I don't want you becoming one of them.
And I told him, like, Dad, if I died doing something that wanted to do,
I died doing something I wanted to do.
And so he signed for me.
I signed when I was 17 years old.
And I knew I wanted to go in and I never thought we would ever go to war.
I just wanted to go.
What year was every year?
I used to 92.
1992.
Yeah.
You, did you just graduate from high school?
Or did you go in between your junior and your senior year to become?
No, I, I signed when I was still in my senior year.
And then I was on a debt program and I went in November of 1992.
And graduated February of 93.
And you, enlisted in the reserves.
Mm-hmm.
And so when you enlisted in the reserves, you go to boot camp.
And then you go to AI, or what school of infantry?
The school of infantry.
There, back then we did a Marine Combat Training, which is a four week condensed course of,
you know, we're going to do humps and we're going to go out and shoot things.
And then we're after that, when we separate the people who were doing, like,
admin jobs, they would go away, you know, and they would go to their other school.
But we would do the seatback drag from one side of Geiger to the other side of Geiger.
And then, you know, from there we'd start our infantry.
So I joined up as an O3-11 rifleman.
I didn't really understand what it was.
I said, no one else, a high school.
You know, I was like, oh, I get to go shoot things.
I didn't really know about all the running and all the, you know, hundred pound packs
and, you know, going out for 27 miles and stuff like that.
But I was like, I want to shoot a 50-k'o.
All right, cool.
All right, now you got to clean it.
You know, I never, they never put that into the advertisements, do they cleaning weapons?
Fund issued a pain to clean.
Did you play any sports that got you ready for this?
I didn't.
We traveled so much to kid.
And I never really stayed in one spot for too long.
And growing up and having that mother that's tied,
I felt more trying to find my connection to my roots.
And I grew up knowing about my uncle who fought in Moetai.
And so, by the time we settled down in Ohio,
met some people in the tire forces before Moetai was anything.
And I started going to the backyard.
He started training me on some stuff that I had no idea.
It was so cool.
And then from there, I just went straight into the Marine Corps.
The only thing that I would really say that I would prepare for it was
Bailing Hey.
You'll pick it up, you know,
Bails a hay thrown up from sun up to sun down.
And the guy was driving the tractor was a former Marine.
He was like, you got to work faster than this.
And then so you get done with with boot camp and S.A.Y.
And what does that take?
Like six months something like that?
Something like that.
And then you're done with your Marine Corps indoctrination, right?
And now it's back to the Sanchezus,
to the Sanchezus, to the land sector.
I checked into my unit, which was MP company.
They had a small detachment of reinforced,
which was basically most of this were grunts.
And at the time, they were like, hey,
you're something called gravesplotin.
I don't want you.
Okay.
What does that mean?
You're supposed to handle remains and more.
I'm like, well, I didn't join up for that.
I don't want it to be a grunt.
And it's like, well, I'm not supposed to stay here,
because we're not going to go to war.
I had a beat or car anyway, and if I was a driving warehouse,
it would look good like getting there.
So yeah, I stayed with that unit.
It's a graceful tune, eventually turned into more jewelry affairs.
And that's how I ended up being in that unit.
And then what were you doing for a civilian job?
I bounced around from being in like,
I'm a security unit.
I worked for a couple department stores.
I ended up working in, you know,
for low security.
And then I applied for every police job that I could.
So it's a date and PD, Anguad, and Beaver Creek.
And next thing I know, my dad said, hey,
the post offices, going to be hiring.
Like, oh, sure.
I'll go ahead and take that test.
And I got to call back from them.
I was like, awesome. I got to work with my dad.
Because me and my dad, when we were growing up,
you know, he was always yelling at me.
I was the knucklehead, you know,
I'm not listening to him.
I'm sneak out on my window,
go hang out on my friends, kind of thing at night.
And here, I got to work with my dad,
and I got to know him in a totally different light.
You know, more of a man demand and not as a father and son.
And we came really good friends.
And I really, really loved hanging out with them.
And going to work with them in the morning and waiting on him at night.
Stuffed, he'd always have a cup of coffee waiting for me in the morning.
And my mom would fix me a, you know,
a little breakfast sandwich and a aluminum foil.
And so it's really cool.
And I really look finally upon those days.
And then you're doing, um,
you missed the first call for.
And so what's your drill consist of?
One weekend a month, two weeks in the summertime.
Week in the month.
Just as advertised.
Right.
Um, and every once in a while,
they might have another school pop up.
And by the time I picked up corporal,
and sergeant, I was like, yeah,
I want to do two of these a year.
One do get my official, like,
sergeant's course out of the way.
But then I want to go out to Bridgeport at California and, you know,
snow ski and climb,
and I love that stuff.
Go to Norway and go out there and see the,
Aurora borealis,
you know, they always like, man,
this is so awesome.
I love this stuff.
Did they train you in any of the graves,
platoon, stuff at this time?
No.
This is funny.
Um, nobody updated it.
Nobody updated it.
Manuals from World War II.
So we were practicing stuff that were World War II,
tenings.
Um, all the, all the stuff,
the diagrams on the inside was like,
an old airplane, like,
like a bomber or something.
If they were crashing,
you would have these big pieces and stuff.
And, you know,
and they will talk about if you clean out a tank,
which back then Sherman tanks,
all steel,
they blow up stuff,
everything's usually contained on there.
But, you know,
and that's how we thought it was going to be.
But it was mostly,
focusing on infantry skills.
So we would do a lot of patrolling.
And we would patrolling to an area.
That's when we set up a perimeter.
And then we would do a quick cleanup.
Somebody's like,
all right,
do you three guys,
you're dead.
Get on the letters.
We're going to carry you back then.
That kind of thing.
We really didn't know how to prepare for war.
And do our jobs.
You know?
Nobody had to see anything like this
since Vietnam,
but nobody wrote it down.
Yeah, that was the 90s.
That was the 90s.
That was the 90s,
that was the 90s.
That was the 90s.
The 90s.
Top track of this is already the 90s.
That's the 90s.
This can be used by a scientist
who has been job indirectly approve.
You know,
you're out walking your route,
and your personal supervisor
drives up.
And he said,
hey Chris,
your marine unit just called the office,
on his face.
Then you say here, the Marine Corps had never called the post office looking for me before.
And the latest and greatest from the air waves had not been good.
This had to be serious business.
The United States and Iraq had been playing a silly game of posturing for years now.
With the terrorist attack on the Twin Towers in New York City, a little over a year ago,
and the Afghan war raging on, all this just might have been coming to ahead in another
region of the world.
So you must have been hearing about other units getting called up.
And had to know what was going down.
We had the 26th Mewsock Marine Expeditionary Unit come over to Dayton, Ohio.
And they were staying at right-patter-shener for space.
And they were flying to 53s and 46s all around.
And they were practicing clarin' out buildings and stuff, and the newspaper said, we're
preparing for Baghdad, we're preparing to go in Iraq.
And I thought, well, if anything was to happen, I'll be getting called up to that.
But that was kind of after they left, nobody started, you know, always talk about anything
more.
So, hey, go back to the River and Mail.
Until I get my phone call, and I always dreamt about it and how it could happen and stuff.
But how many times have they said, oh, prepare for this?
Oh, no, stand down.
We're going to go up to Vietnam and help clean it.
No, we're not.
We're going to go to Kosovo and help no, no, we're not.
And then finally, we're doing this.
We're not going to get called up.
They're not going to be this.
So the call comes.
You find out that you're actually getting an activated.
And you say here, I was excited, sad, overwhelmed, unsure, motivated, and proud all at the
same time.
That's a pretty good combination of emotions.
I knew that this day was the first baby step in a wild Odyssey that would take my life
for a whirl.
And in the end, leave me a very different man than I was before that phone call.
I wasn't stupid or blind to the prospect that in the very near future, a father might
lose a son, a wife might lose a husband, a daughter might lose a father, and a daydream
of better days may never be fulfilled.
Because at this point, you're married and you have a daughter.
And how long has you been married for at this point?
Oh, man.
Over two years.
Okay.
Young dad, young dad, you know, first real job.
It just got house, you know, and just love in life, you know.
I didn't think, you know, anything was ever going to happen.
I was going to spend my 20 plus years at the post office.
And that was it.
And be happily married.
Like pick it fences and dogs, you know, mom's apple pie kind of thing, you know.
Uh, well, you signed that dotted line.
I know.
You signed that dotted line.
You say here in the Grand Structure of the Marine Corps, our reserve unit was like no
other.
We were a hot pot, hot pot collection of different mission occupational specialties, MOSs.
Most of us came straight out of infantry school, holding such titles as riflemen, machine
gunners, and assault men.
Others were administrative Marines, motor transport, map makers, and aircraft repairmen.
There were a healthy mix of Marines who had prior service and those like me who did not.
College students made up a good portion of the platoon working on medical, political science
and criminal justice degrees.
There were many of us blue collar guys in the mix having jobs anywhere from a train
conductor and plumber to law enforcement officers.
Within our ranks, we were 33 strong outside the remote chance of participating in the recovery
of lost remains in Vietnam or some sunny tropical island in the South Pacific.
None of us ever wanted to be activated to do the mission in a wartime capability.
We were proud to be the only mortuary affairs platoon in the entire Marine Corps.
Even though in reality, we really didn't know what that duty would demand of us or what
kind of toll it would take.
You guys were the only mortuary affairs platoon in the entire Marine Corps.
So it was a guarantee you guys were getting called up.
And then back in the 90s, they were talking about getting rid of us.
All up until our Lieutenant Colonel decided to change the name and try to make it sexier.
And he was able to save that.
It convinced enough people over at headquarters Marine Corps that we should save this little group.
You know what he knew?
That apparently other people didn't know is that the nature of war is death.
And you're going to have to deal with this.
Because if you think about what would be going on if you didn't have this platoon and what
knowledge would be lost and who's going to handle these?
Yeah.
That's what happens in peacetime.
People forget that you know even preparing for something like this, we would always come
out here to camp pelton and we would get ready to get trained and they were like,
oh, what do you guys do?
Mortuary affairs.
So what do you guys do?
We handle the cease.
No, you guys are going to be working at the kitchen.
You guys are going to be a KP.
You guys are going to do a Mestuity for two weeks.
No, we're not.
So we'll go out and get lost.
We don't take our stuff out to you know, out to the beach, get lost.
Hook up with with a recon unit that was doing night inserts on Zodiacs.
And that's what we did for two weeks, man.
But yeah, everybody back then was, oh, nobody's going to die.
No, we won't even need you.
We can look at the Gulf War.
No, no.
No, no, this how they actually started when we actually got deployed to that was the
attitude.
So you know, you go through some stuff about what you guys did when you guys got called
up and I have to say, I always have to say this, I'm not reading the whole book.
And so this might jump around a little bit or you might think, oh, what was that?
Well, it's because I'm not reading the whole book.
You got to buy the book yourself.
That's what you need to do to get these to get this entire story.
And this is a big book and there's all kinds of details that don't go into.
So I'm just covering some of it.
So if it jumps a little bit, that's why.
And I'm going to make a jump right now to this.
As we circled about in a holding pattern, high above the sand's a quake, curious marines
gazed out upon our new reality.
This was to be our new home away from home.
And the lives that we knew were now over.
That toilet and hard work were the only promises that the Marine Corps afforded us.
And we reveled at the very thought of it.
We are the marines of M.A.
We were from Dayton, Ohio.
And we were eager for the chance to prove ourselves on active duty.
We were eager to prove ourselves in war.
That's the attitude.
And there's, you go through some great stuff in here, just talking about.
And talking about what your guy's attitude was like.
And it's exactly what you think everyone's attitude would be like in the Marine Corps,
in the Army, in special operations.
We've been training this stuff for our whole lives and we're ready to go.
And actually I was going to say that there was probably no one in your cartoon that had ever
been any kind of combat.
But you actually had a few guys that had been in the first call floor.
Thank you, I had to.
Yeah.
Because my first deployment to Iraq, there was zero experience.
And zero combat experience, which was pretty normal for the SEAL teams, because we hadn't
been in a war in whatever 20 years.
And so there was a couple of guys that had to action in Somalia, a couple of guys that had
action in Panama, that weren't in my platoon.
But most guys were just fresh.
And then you think about it.
Even guys that were in the first goal for the chances that they were in some of those
scenarios that had like legitimate combat.
A, the chances of that were very small.
And b, even if they were in that, it was like isolated incidents.
You know, even guys in the SEAL team that were in the goal for that got in firefights,
it was isolated like they got into a firefight.
Right.
It wasn't sustained combat operations that, that obviously we were about to move into
as a nation.
We had a very good healthy mix of guys who served back then during the goal for
their BFCs and Lance Corpals and they were all infantry guys.
So we got guys from being mortarmen, machine gunners, and you know, we got guys who were
supplied guys.
So we kind of got the idea of more of a bigger picture of what to expect as far as how the
living conditions were there.
What was the mindset of being?
Because most of us were just, hey, we're finally on act of duty.
This is so freaking cool.
And hey, let's go ahead and fill Sandbags.
I love filling Sandbags.
You know, because at home we don't fill Sandbags, but, you know, we were very lucky, very,
very lucky to have the people that we did.
And thank God we had them just because, yes, they had that leadership experience, but
also they prepared us very well to handle the pressures that we're about to come.
But I had a little bit only 22 miles from the Iraqi border camp, coyote was a gigantic
US military installation of open desert terrain populated by small encampments named after
different Marine Corps battles, which dotted the vast open, coyote landscape from California
to Ireland to Cyprus to Kuwait International Airport to highway 80 to camp coyote.
And now finally, our long trip of 30 plus hours ended on Camp Tartwa.
We were exhausted, but still excited enough to check out our new digs.
We quickly unloaded our gear off the truck and we were directed to our assigned white
tent just like the ones at the airport.
It was hard to believe that we were actually in Kuwait standing on the line against
the despotic dictator.
Somewhere across these desert stands, he was waiting for us and by all accounts with weapons
of mass destruction.
It was only going to be a matter of time before something big happened that would change
the whole world.
Only time would tell what would happen next.
Now, of course, people like to talk now about the weapons of mass destruction, which
you know, there was isolated things that were found, but you know, there wasn't, he
never attacked US forces or coalition forces with weapons of mass destruction.
But you guys had to think that was common.
Oh, we knew it was common.
And we already resigned ourselves off if it was common that most of us wouldn't make it.
When the shooting started, they pushed us up there.
Of our trucks out of the three units, that many teams that we had, each of us had 1200
remains pouches or body backs.
They're expecting us to fight and keep on fighting until we died and the other two units
that we trained before we left the US, those guys, which was a come-up and clean us up
with another 1200 remains body bags after them.
So they were expecting a health fire.
And we're the first time that we were honestly looking at combat resembling World War
one stuff.
But with worst stuff on the menu, you know, Vx nerve gas.
Yeah, I mean, all the prospects was just, it was dire.
It was bad.
You say here, we moved from Camp Taro to Camp Iwo Jima within our first week and soon
after we arrived, we were notified that every unit on Iwo Jima had to build at least one
bunker as a defense against Saddam Hussein's ballistic missile inventory.
When our first week of being on Iwo Jima were assigned to our area to build one scud bunker,
our days consisted of filling, throwing, and neatly stacking 35 to 40 pound sandbags for
first light until late evening all by hand.
We were a service.
It was a brand new thing for us to do and we turned everything into a game and had fun with
it.
We would laugh, joke, and sing songs as we accomplished our task and the senior leadership
of the active duty platoons watching us would stand in awe of how we worked together as
we performed our medial tasks such as sandbag duty.
On occasion, I heard a few of them ask our leaders what their secret was to get all of
us troops to be so motivated.
Gunnery Sergeant Ballantine, I say that right, Ballantine, Ballantine would only shrug and
smile.
I had to put that in there and there's so many things again, I got to select what I'm
going to read out of here, but just that attitude of we're going to have a good time.
Absolutely.
It is the best attitude.
Turn everything into a game and roll with it.
You get your first taste of what's to come when a black-hawk crash occurred and you say
here it was quite a trick while riding across the desert in our home-vees, but we finally
arrived and set eyes upon the crash scene.
It was nothing short of shocking.
The yellow was spread across the distance of a football field and literally thousands of
twisted, burnt and melted pieces.
From our vantage point, the scene looked so much more complex than anything our World
War II era manuals had explained, recovery scenes to be.
There was no way that all that classroom work and infield training could have ever
replicated the amount of destruction that lay upon the field.
Now, this is interesting, but since this was considered a peace-time accident, the National
Transportation Safety Board had the lead on the investigation not the military and they dictated
who was allowed on the scene and who wasn't.
You guys show up and they let you guys help them.
Right.
They're a manpower.
You say we found several portions of human remains scattered throughout as well as a few
personal items such as fragments of a watch.
We kept finding a hard glass-like substance resembling thick, burnt sugar or melted glass
in the sand.
This substance was found in large pools and spread throughout the crash site.
We had to chip away at it so we continued to search for pieces of human remains fragments
and pertinent identification media.
Once asked, the NTSB agent informed us that the glass-like substance was actually pools
of blood that had been exposed to high heat and then crystallized.
It was something that we never had been taught.
And all the literature did not mention how bodily fluids such as blood could caramelize
and resemble burnt sugar or melted glass.
It also did not mention that when sections of the Heal of Burned or Melted, they
can resemble bone or burned flesh.
The most valuable lesson that I learned that day was how to use in everyday items such
as a screwdriver to tell of questionable items who are indeed human remains versus burned
metal, insulating foam or melted plastics and silicon.
Just tap the item with a screwdriver and one can feel the difference.
This was definitely something that was not taught or even mentioned.
One day in the future this new technique would prove to be very handy.
What is that?
What's the difference?
You come across some fragment.
You want to know if it's human remains or if it's part of the cartman aircrafts.
Vehicles, helicopters.
There are so many components that are made with all these different composite materials
and plastics and rubbers and metals that they all look the same.
They all look like human remains that are burned up and mangled.
It is very, very hard to tell the difference.
I never knew that until we worked with these gentlemen.
They pulled out a screwdriver and they showed us how to do it.
There's like I said in there, you can feel how if you tap it and how it, because
it's like a can.
You can feel that that's a solid piece.
If you tap it, it's something that's burnt flesh.
It has its own kind of makeup and you can tell.
When these catastrophic scenes are like this, you can literally look at millions and millions
of pieces and to narrow things down.
That was just a tripped day show.
I've never seen anything like that before.
We were very, very fortunate to work with those guys.
You guys are in Kuwait and obviously this whole time there's the tension we're waiting,
you're waiting, not knowing what's going to happen.
One night you're asleep and going back to the book, I heard the shuffle of boots scraping
the loose sand against the plywood floor and it caught my attention, but I kept my eyes
closed just in case it wasn't for me.
I heard a flick of a flashlight being turned on, a normal nightleak occurrence in the
of the fire watch waking up is relief for duty.
I heard a cop squeak as the fire watch was trying to wake someone, Sergeant Bustler.
The whisper seemed too loud against the quieter the dark tent.
I opened my eyes and found the beam of flashlight shining in my face and another MA
Marine three cops down over here, Webster, what's up, man?
We are going to war, bus.
President Bush just told Saddam that him and his sons have 48 hours to get out of his
country or we will forcefully remove him.
He excitedly whispered those words, but it seemed as if he had yelled it out for everyone
to hear because he said all the key words that made everyone's ears perk up out of a
deep sleep.
So there you go.
And a little while later the announcement comes in, the loud announcement come in.
Hey, somebody turn on the fucking lights, wake up, wake the fuck up.
I don't care what you and you belong to.
This shit applies to you.
The president United States has just spoken and he's given Saddam who's saying in the
sons, 48 hour deadline to pack their shit and get out of the fucking country.
If they do not comply, the president has given us the green light to evict their asses.
So that's it.
Now you guys know, continue on, are you divided up into three official teams?
We received the final gear check, the ammo, the extra ammo had been disseminated.
But there was a giant deficiency that was blatant in everyone's thought.
We had no vehicles to transport us north, north.
We had no night vision goggles to see in the dark and we had no crew serve weapons to set
up proper defensive positions.
The entire Marine Corps was going to war and no one had fought to give us body baggers
the needed assets to support them.
So no night vision?
Nothing.
No vehicles.
We were literally begging people.
As people were gearing up, they're loading up their vehicles.
Everybody is loading up ammo, water, chow and everything.
High five in each other, you know, hugging and here we are staring at everybody sitting
on the bench.
You know, wait for everybody.
Hey, can we please go?
Hey guys, we'd like to play too.
Luckily there was some maneuvering going on, going back to the major in the gun.
The major in gunning bound time, for Nagled to deal with the camp common down back at
the O'Gima, so Colonel Higgins is giving us three five tons with trailers.
It took a while but our three vehicles rolled up and each of our team strapped our packs
onto the outside and hurriedly prepared our areas in the bed of the trucks.
And again, jumping forward, the convoy headed north on the highway, passed the Toyota
trucks with large machine guns, mounted in the back of the coiety police.
We made our way into the desert, past coiety, T72 tanks, patrolling their side of the Iraqi
border.
And several miles we arrived at our destination.
The sun was beginning its trek toward the far horizon.
And as far as my eyes could see, there were military trucks and humbys all spread out
with hundreds of with hundreds of yards in between them.
Balantine's team, three truck, sat about 200 yards away and I could see them digging
in.
All right, guys, Sergeant Davis spoke up.
We are now well within, well inside Iraqi artillery range.
We need to immediately dig skirmish holes to sleep in and change over into our mop suits.
Make sure that you keep your gas mask on you at all times because we don't know when the
Iraqi army will start hitting us with gas or eat your holes.
North is that way.
And remember what everybody is, do not get out of your holes unless you absolutely have to.
And there is 100% light discipline because light travels out here and we don't want to give
the Iraqi something to shoot out.
Good to go.
Good.
Let's get it done.
So you're putting your mop suits on, which is your chemical biological radiological protection
allegedly suits.
I always thought to myself, how is this thing going to stop anything from going from, I mean,
you don't, it's just like a jacket with some charcoal in it.
Yeah.
Some activated charcoal.
Some pants with activated charcoal.
You're wearing your regular boots.
I guess we had boot covers too.
I did one off where we did it. We were hitting a suspected weapons of masterstruction site.
And so we went in mop level four.
Gas masks on.
Wow.
Boots to hold nine yards gloves.
We were not as effective as we should.
And I was putting that thing on, you know, how is, it's just, it's just, you're putting
on a pair of pants and it's sure not like some airtight thing.
No, not at all.
It doesn't make any sense when you're putting it on.
So I don't have a lot of confidence on those things.
But like I said, it's interesting that, you know, the quote that you give from Sergeant
Davis is, is we don't know when the Iraqi army will start to hit us with gas.
It wasn't like if they will.
It's like when?
Yep.
We fully expected it.
Jumped forward under the pitch black sky of a Quadie night.
I finally surrendered my conscious to slumber.
I no longer feared the unknown.
I was willing to accept my fate as it came.
It was time to prove ourselves and rid the world of a monster.
Next chapter is called Into the Breach.
Holy shit.
Look at all the impacts up there.
Curve, curve, caler.
My saying that right.
Corporal caler said, I almost fell asleep until I heard the jets flying over.
God damn brother, we are at war now.
This shit is for real.
We are at fucking war.
The morning crept in.
And then it comes gas gas gas.
Oh my god.
Fuck.
The other trucks, a hundred yards from a screamed out.
I closed my eyes, held my breath instantly reached down from my gas mask.
My adrenaline shot through the freaking roof.
Did the bastards actually drop gas on us?
What we thought was a fast time to put a gas mask on back in Ewo Jima.
Now had just been beat.
We rushed putting on our mobgeat suits, cinching down the Velcro straps around the rubber
boots and around the wrists.
The black rubber gloves came on last and suddenly I could feel the warmth of the sun
soaking through the rubber suits infused with charcoal lining.
And that gives it away right there.
The Velcro straps around the rubber.
Like that's supposed to help you.
You know, it just doesn't.
Doesn't seem to make sense.
Going forward.
We'll learn one among many that day as soon as all clear was sounded and we could hear
the rest of the Marines down from us carry out the order.
Gas gas gas would be sounded again.
It repeated itself and became an all day game as soon as we opened an MRE for
child.
The alarm would be sounded and we had to suit up when the all clear came.
It was sounded once more.
I started to think that maybe I shouldn't have been eating my open MRE.
Literally, since one side would be saying all clear the other side would be saying gas
gas gas and it was just chasing each other all day long.
It would be got stupid.
But we've found out later on was they were monitoring the Iraqi skin missiles and whenever
they flipped the radar on so they can get prepared to launch they would call a gas
attack.
Got it.
It was literally somebody up there was flipping off and flipping on flipping on.
And as far as I know, for my position they didn't send any.
But it was very, very annoying all day long.
And the reason they have to flip those things on and off is they flip them on so they
can kind of see where they're shooting them and prep them.
And so I'm sure.
And then as soon as you do that, Americans are going to bomb you big time.
So that's, I'm guessing what that's what it was.
Although I guess, it's just surface there.
You could have it pre-dialed and maybe you don't need to give a signal.
Who knows?
But that's the kind of thing that happens in the military.
You don't know.
There's just things that are going on that you don't fully know.
Continuing on, everything that we had trained for and been in preparation for was this
exact moment.
We had to hone our skills sharpened our mind, strengthen our bodies and prepared our
spirits for this fight.
We had committed our lives to the winds of fate.
Our futures were now uncertain about our determination and rules of which see us through
whatever hardships and challenges lay upon that horizon ahead.
Contact with the enemy had already been initiated and we were moving northward toward
the sound of guns.
We were heading straight into the breach and the end of Sodom's rule begins tonight.
It was bumper to bumper traffic, keeping along Highway 80, making our way to the fluorescent
lights of the UN border checkpoint.
We slowly made our way into the pitch black of an abandoned village.
The only sound that could be heard were the idling of our engines and the nervous complaints
of a lone dog barking in the night.
It was the very first time I'd ever witnessed a regimental artillery fire mission in
action.
It was truly a beautiful sight to behold.
These are the perspective that you have when you're going into this stuff for the first
time.
It was just incredible.
And I really could look at these rounds being shot out and it looked like shooting stars
going up into the sky and they didn't see them crashing down to earth on top of Safwan
Hill.
And I could look at that scene playing out right before us and mirroring it to, you know,
I would gema or an okinawa, your D-day is like wow that's just incredible.
And I just felt so connected to this brotherhood of a long line of people fighting for
freedom and you know, it was just all inspiring.
Yeah, that's, when you, like you said, you grew up watching this stuff.
You know, I grew up watching this stuff.
And so when you see it for real happening and you know you're a part of it, oh yeah.
Man, yeah, it's very, I allowed to say that's a good feeling because it's a good
feeling.
I'm sorry.
Everyone, that's a good feeling when you know you're part of something that's, and
you know, you do a great job in here discussing why we were going there.
What type of person Sadama is it?
It's a great section.
And it's one of the reasons that makes the book powerful because you give some historical
background about the whole situation.
You explain who this guy was, what kind of, I can't even say what kind of person he was
in animal, you know, he was an animal, his sons were just savages and they were horrible, evil
people.
And so when I say it feels good, well, you, you've got to have that historical context
about who the enemy is and then you realize, okay, we're going to liberate these people
that have been living under this oppressive regime for decades and we're here.
We can make this happen.
Yeah.
And yeah, you know what, that does feel really good, especially when we cross the border.
When we started seeing people, they're welcome and saying, kids, literally, you would
have these kids know shoes on their feet and you would not see a structure as far as the
eye could see.
You would not see a car or a donkey or motorcycle or nothing.
And they would walk all the way from wherever they came from all the way to meet us at
the road and welcome and saying, and whenever we stop, because over there the alth
convoyes were all mashed together and all jammed together so it would sit there.
And they would even though we tried to keep them off our vehicles, they climbed up and
they were so excited, they came up and was kissing our hands and, you know, kids were waving
at us and stuff.
And in one in particular, I wish I could find this picture.
It was a little girl that they had dressed up in the best clothes that she had.
She had a pink dress, white, frilly, frilly laces on it and white pattern leather shoes.
And her dad was crouched down behind her and she was just waving at us.
And I realized what that American flag means to them.
Because these people back in 1992, revolted against Adon who's saying and he crushed that
rebellion and diverted the U.F.
and tigers rivers away from their homeland so they didn't have any form fields anymore.
They didn't have anything.
He was trying to snuff out a 5,000-year-old culture and that's what he was doing.
So those people will work welcome at us in because we were their only hope at their survival
of their culture.
And then at that moment, it just struck me.
Wow, we are here for them and we are that American flag means something.
So something that people take for granted every day.
You go down the street, you see it over there outside of a building or people's front yards.
And you don't realize how impactful, how powerful that symbol is until you see somebody
who is literally, their culture is weathering away and we were their only hope and it was just
incredible.
And as I said, that feels good.
And you have to know that context but that feels good to be a part of that.
No doubt about it.
I guess I'm not apologetic for that.
You guys are moving forward now.
Our ground pounders up front were putting a world of hurt on those Iraqi combatants who decided
to stay in fight.
We passed Iraqi tanks and armored troop carriers that seem to be knocked out effortlessly
by the Marines ahead of us, somewhere still on fire with rounds popping and snapping
inside them.
Some had their turrets slapped off their chaffets, chasses with a steam of curling smoke rising
from their mechanical guts.
Shot up pickup trucks with mounted machine guns were leaking engine food, mixing with blood
of their former occupants.
But it seemed like the large black flies knew that Task Force Ripper was in town.
They had been waiting patiently for the enemy dead and by the time we had passed the
remains a small black, small cloud of black flies had already began to their feasts.
The sight of the enemy dead was so routine that they no longer captured our attention.
They became as common as roadkill back home and regarded the same way in consequential.
It was truly a sight to see because no matter what direction one was to look along that
road, all one saw was the finest.
The world's finest fighting force moving north toward Baghdad, removing all Saddam's
bathest henchmen and waving all at all the friendly people rejoicing in the streets.
And now you get into this and I remember when this happened from state side.
A tempest wind started to blow gradually, increasing with strength, this time progressed and
whipped up loose sand and rocks into the air, painting the scorching hot gusts of wind
into an ever darker shade of orange and red.
It was a storm unlike anything that I'd ever seen and I would consider it as close to
what I'd imagined a windstorm of biblical proportions to be.
The order was passed to halt in place after a rumor that an M1 Abrams tank was lost crossing
the Euphrates River.
Visibility beyond ten feet became impossible and it was hard to tell if a dark shade of
red was a vehicle cruising by or dust in the wind.
Some of the speeding trucks almost rammed into us as we stopped coming less than ten feet
from our trailer before they swirfed.
So you guys are in that massive storm.
I remember watching the news as everyone was pushing up all of a sudden was a all stop.
Yeah.
And everybody was, everybody was on top of everybody.
We could have no idea who everybody was next to us.
Literally a vehicle passed by and would not see you until it was almost too late.
We couldn't go out beyond an armed distance because it was that bad.
I had never seen anything.
It was just a gigantic wall of orange dirt.
Did it come in one wall?
No, no.
It started off slow.
The winds started picking up and it was like, no, okay, now it's starting to get that.
You know, you put your arms up like this and you can start to pick up your suit and start
doing this stuff here and open up.
And then it just got brown and then darker, then orange and then red and then so thick
you couldn't see anything.
And it literally felt like it was piercing my mom's suit.
It was that strong and it was miserable.
And how long were you guys laid up for?
For three days, three days.
We moved very next day.
Okay.
So it was just all the next day.
Right.
So it had that sandstorm that hole night.
And then after that, our tent, our tent, our canvas for our five-ton ripped and it was
blowing in the wind and we had no place to hide and all the sudden it started raining
on us.
The whole grain and we just sat there and just took it and it was miserable.
All the weapons were jammed up full of food.
It looked like wet concrete coming out of those things.
And then we realized that we were still surrounded by baguettes with AKs and RPKs and RPGs
and we knew that their weapons were working this stuff.
And ours has a little bit of a problem with what concrete and something.
So yeah, it's hit freaking sucked.
But we moved the very next day and it was all all a gigantic wall of fog.
Whether it is not cooperates, Murphy's law.
So you say it didn't take too long, but the kinks of the overlapping convoys were slowly
worked out and we were off this time swirling curtains of a delicate mist.
It was impossible to figure out exactly where everybody was in relation to us.
The fog was way too thick.
Our units were strewn out and visibility was at a minimum.
The only way that we could make it through this area expeditiously was to provide our own
security as our convoys leap frog each other.
And that our convoys would hold and punch out Marines to provide security.
And then the convoys behind us would leap frog through us and stop once through our lines
and provide security for us.
It was an all day affair of getting out our vehicles quickly setting up and to provide
security within a reasonable distance to allow communications but to be dispersing off that
one mortar RPG round couldn't take out multiple Marines.
One signaled, we would mount back up, take accountability to ensure that no one was left
behind and roll out.
So this is just classic cover move.
Right.
I always have to highlight a little cover move.
And then at one point it was once again our turn to provide security.
The Marines got down, taking up their normal positions just as they had done does it's
the times thus day that far.
The first sergeant screamed contact rear, contact rear, 100% get off the fucking trucks.
Contact rear with the hell is he talking oh shit.
I was in denial that we were actually being shot at.
I grabbed my helmet and rifle and then quickly jumped down onto the asphalt and looked
for any micro terrain that I hoped would serve to shield me against incoming gunfire.
The reports increased slowly and built up tempo like popcorn popping in a microwave.
The order was given a form of straight line 90 degrees off the highways so that we could
trap the enemy in a L shape, otherwise known as a crossfire.
They say that you never know how you will react in combat until it happens to you.
I could hear others nervously cracking jokes, one guy to my left by the road was vomiting
and one guy further down the line from me said that he had shid his pants.
I've never found out if that was true if he was just joking.
But who would want to find out?
It sounds silly now but all the training that those drill instructors at Paris Island
had pounded in my head 10 years earlier had kicked in and I was in calm and as focus as I
could be.
I just sang a little country song to myself.
The same one that the troops were singing just a short bit before Travis Trits.
It's a great day to be alive.
I quickly checked, rechecked and tripled check my fundamentals of marksmanship, proper body
alignment, proper breath control, found my natural point of aim and ensure that my magazines
were readily available.
This was my one time my one opportunity to get some.
So don't fail, don't fuck up and don't die.
A marine from the convoy further down for me was in a full on hyperventilating panic.
She was in the prone position, her weapon laid impently in the sand before her.
Her hands cubs her face as she tried to hold back uncontrollable tears.
We tried desperately to calm her down shouting words of encouragement.
Now we were down one gun for this fight and peering into a fog that held actively
that held an actively engaging force.
The an urge to walk over to her and put that M16 into her arms had only been stopped
by the increasing tempo of the incoming rounds.
The 762 by 39 rounds it formed into black streaks against the white background of the fog.
When the rounds got close they sounded like angry hornets just overhead.
When they got too close they snapped as loud as black cat firecrackers, which left
a high pitched wine in my ears.
Rocket propelled grenades flew between us and exploded off in the opaque mist behind the
form of our formation.
If we were to meet the enemy, let them come.
Marines on the line started congratulating each other.
Pre-maturely yelling out, hell yeah, Marines combat action ribbons.
Silhouettes faded in and out of the mist as the fog shifted.
It was very confusing.
Am I conserved over a concerned, friendly fire situation?
I knew where we were.
I knew where the road was so that was the base of fire.
But I had no idea what the other convoy was doing.
Were they setting out an L-shaped on their side?
Were they locating, closing with, and destroying the enemy by fire and maneuver?
Were they going to do squad rushes into the Iraqi positions?
Therefore crossing into our fields of fire.
At that point I had no idea.
I was absolutely positive that I did not want to shoot at a silhouette and have it turn
out to be one of our Marines hooking and jabbing with a bad guy.
Okay, somebody figured this shit out so we can pop these dudes.
Then out of nowhere there was a boom that shook the ground, followed by a quick rocket
sound.
I screamed out what the fuck was that?
I was afraid an RPG would hit an ammunition laden truck on the road and have all those
155 millimeter artillery rounds explode just dozens of yards away.
A voice called out from the road and said, it's okay.
We are hitting them with tow missiles.
Apparently anti tank missiles on top of the gun trucks had thermal vision capability
which the gunner just happened to exploit.
The tow gunner was pointing out to which area to shoot and some of the Marines on the line
started to fire a few rounds in that general direction.
I could see shadows in the shifting mist but I still didn't want to shoot one of our
Marines by mistake.
The first sergeant yelled out, you first five Marines shift fire to the left, get up and
move toward the road.
They're going to try and cut us off.
We repeated the command shift fire left.
I wait a minute, stop.
I looked to my left.
I looked to my right.
The incoming machine gun fire made a roaring past my head and made me feel like a gigantic
target.
I just wished I could crawl up inside my helmet.
I had to do a gut check and remember saying to myself, well Chris, you've lifted
good life.
Fuck it.
And I resigned myself to the winds of fate and the hands of God.
I just got up and ran as hard as I could.
But it was one of those little moments in time when life flashes before your eyes and
time seems to slow the fuck down.
The angry black streaking hornet seemed to get a little closer and the mud seemed to get
thicker.
My boots seemed as if I had a heavy cast iron weights tied to my legs.
I could now see the first former reinstarting to hit the deck and low crawled to cover with
splashes of impacts dancing around them.
For a moment I had cursed myself and started to wish that I hadn't been so motivated
when all this started and ran so far out.
I looked over to my right toward the enemy and snap around almost hit me in the helmet.
God damn I yelled to myself and automatically my body went to the ground.
But before my left hand could reach the ground, snap another round almost hit me in the face.
Fuck.
A couple more rounds snapped around me as I hide crawled.
Like I never hide crawled before.
I got to my destination behind a pile of mud and I just lay there looking at the former
Marines who were watching me.
PFC Raim was said, holy shit sergeant.
I saw those rounds coming out of the fog and I thought I was going to watch you get
shot in the face.
Yeah, holy shit.
So did I Raim was.
And that's a detailed description and I actually skipped the bottom.
There's some great details in there. You end up talking to another kid from where's he
from?
Was he from Ty?
He was from Cambodia.
He was the skate cam in the family of Skate cam.
And they lived in the refugee camp on the Thai border.
He comes up, I run down there and he looks at me because hey, you look like you like
a Southeast Asian.
Yeah, my mom's from Thailand.
But yeah, it's white and today I'm here I am.
So we were just catching up and see how you doing.
You know, meeting in my ramos is like, hey, how the hell can you guys talk about that
shit right now?
Can you just see what's going on?
And I was like, well, shit, if I'm going to fight and die, my husband will know the
guy next to me.
Right on.
Yeah.
Uh, continue it on.
At that point, the ground started to rumble and shake and down the road came a couple
of M1 Abrams tank and a couple of amphibious assault vehicles which split off the road into
the fog, the tank commander on the lead tank was firing as mob dues 50 caliber machine
gun in the main gun shot off around into the fog, illuminating his tank in the mist.
Our convoy, the passing convoy and these tanks and tracks had become intertwined and they
were dispersing a lethal mixture of chaos and hellfire.
On the receiving end of this was an enemy that had clearly picked the wrong marines to shoot
at.
And enthusiastically given base of fire and crushing armored counterattack from the nation's
finest had been something to behold in person and I wanted to witness more.
You know, I always try and profess my love for the tankers and that's the type of situation.
When you hear tanks coming, it is glorious.
Oh, yes.
I can say from my own experiences that I love tankers.
I love tankers.
Yeah.
There's a few times that they definitely was very welcome down to the battlefield.
Yeah, that's a classic.
You're in a gunfight and you get your brothers to bring a tank to a gunfight.
That's a beautiful thing.
Because at that point it was all foggy.
Nobody knew where everybody was.
We still kind of separate ourselves and all the grunts and all the tanks were way ahead of
us.
So when we started getting hit, they're like, oh, there's a unit out there where we're
forgot.
So we routed them and thank God.
They got there right at the right time.
And yeah, took them out and we ended up being dug in on the side of the road a couple
days.
And the guy who the tank commander came up jumped in my hole and thanked me for pointing
out the bad guy.
Right.
Yeah, that makes 84 us now.
Yeah, you know, you were also, I got to give you a lot of credit because you were very
cognizant of the confusion.
Right.
I said this before in a money there was times where there was blue on blues with Humvie
versus Humvie, which is, which just should, I mean, there's no more recognizable vehicle
in the world than Humvie.
And the enemy does not have Humvies.
So can you imagine the mindset of a soldier to shoot at another Humvie?
Like that's what can happen when things start getting crazy.
And the user, you were really aware of the fact that, hey, look, I don't know where everyone
is.
Right.
My self-injection.
I stay calm.
Yeah.
And that's one thing that I, I, I, I, I, I just thank my drone structures for because
they pound it in our heads that all this chaos wars that war is chaos.
It is confusion.
You're trying to make you panic as long as you don't panic and keep your head above
the water and not sink and keep on fighting.
No, stay in there.
No, get into that mode.
Slow your heartbeat down.
Make good decisions.
And no, I, I learned that from from my senior, you know, instructor from Hube, now I stay
in contact with, which is pretty crazy.
And yeah, I took that onto the battlefield and when everybody else is panic around,
you know, it's just seeing Travis Tritt to myself.
And, okay, here's my ammo.
All right.
You know, okay, my point of aim, shift it, I'm good to go.
Anybody pops up there?
I got him.
Yeah.
That ability to take a step back to attach from all that craziness, mayhem.
That's the difference between having a blue on blue for after sight and not, that's, that's
the difference right there.
You, especially being all excited being your first time in combat, that, the kind of
thing that leads to that excitement, you get wrapped up around that emotion and all
so you all cool, I got a target for the first time in my life, I'm going to take this shot.
And then you, you realize it's a bad shot.
It's the most horrible thing that could happen in no matter what you do not ever want
to put yourself in that situation.
It's better to make sure that what you're shooting at is a legitimate target than
make the wrong decision.
First of all, somebody, their lives.
Yeah.
Well, you did, the people that trained you did good and you did good.
That's the Marine Corps does.
Moving forward a little with the instructors, the big fighting positions, it called our
new phase of war and operational halt.
This meant that all Ford progress had stopped in the latest greatest from the powers
that be said that the Grashans were to be cut to only two MREs a day and our fresh water
had been depleted.
Out of fresh water, huh?
Yeah, everything they were given us, tasted like bleach.
You were pumping it straight out of the water that was around us and they dumped all the bleach
in there and it was basically drinking laundry water.
It was nasty.
But, you know, that one thing, one thing, when you get in fights, for me, I stopped becoming
hungry.
I didn't care about eating.
I just needed water.
Yeah, boom.
The thirst is not, you can't go without water that's right.
Right.
So you can go long time without food.
I'm going to fast forward a little bit here, but I thought this was an important section.
You get into an area.
I think it was by Nazaria and you are kind of pushing through an area where there was
a bunch of dead Iraqi soldiers.
By the time you guys got showed up, by the time you showed up there and you are talking
on one of the Marines that's there and you said, do you know if these were Republican
guard or Fed Aien Saddam?
And so at this time, those were kind of the Republican guard was kind of this allegedly
elite unit of Iraqis and the Fed Aien Saddam was this other group of, and you know, you
heard that they were criminals and they were thugs and they were mergers and they were completely
loyal to Saddam.
And so I know when I got over there, it was all about hey, are these guys Fed Aien Saddam?
It was this big kind of deal.
So you're asking the guy who these dead do these dead enemy were, what was it Republican
guard or Fed Aien Saddam?
And he says fucking conscripts brother, the grunts over there captured a Fed Aien officer,
the other night after their attack and he spilled the beans.
He said that all these dead guys were forced to fight us.
The Fed Aien Saddam had gone through the local town back there and recruited these guys
by gunpoint.
If they'd refused, they would shoot their children.
So there was a ton of suit cases on the other side of the berm.
They brought them because they didn't know how long they were going to be away from
home.
And there are some brief cases over there too.
Some of these guys were recruited right off their boss on the way to work.
These poor guys were just given uniforms and weapons and forced to attack us.
If they were to turn around, that captured officer was supposed to execute them.
But the dumbass was too chicken shit to go down with his troops.
So again, I just had to call that out because that's the kind of evil regime that was
in Iraq.
Just forcing people, you can come fight or we're going to kill your children.
And that's why a lot of them surrendered as well.
I mean, there's a ton of Iraqis that surrendered at the beginning of the work as they
were in those situations.
Continue on the fighting to Baghdad was prevalent on everybody's mind.
And every single one of us knew that it was going to be a hell of a fight.
It was sad to know that several of those Marines would not survive that battle.
And I meant to be prepared myself for the worst case scenario.
So you guys are thinking Baghdad is going to be a big ball game there.
Right, at that moment, we were fighting in Nigeria.
So we had a whole task force that was bogged down down there.
And we knew that Baghdad was going to be one hell of a fight.
It's the biggest city of the entire country.
So yeah, it was going to be street to street fighting, house to house fighting.
And there was a little taste of that in Nigeria.
And I remember reading the reports and it was like bogged down.
And Nigeria was like legitimate military operations, military and fighting.
And you get a little taste of that and you realize what that's going to be like.
And then you look at Baghdad with whatever six million people.
You've got to think, you're thinking this is going to be a bloodbath.
Fast forward a little bit.
Our time with Task Force Tarwood come to an end.
And we were to detach ourselves from their convoy once we hit LSA Chestie and old Iraqi Air Force
base a few miles southeast of Outcut.
And again, I fast forward to this point.
By the standards of what we've been used to, this base was absolutely huge.
The CBZ had done a great job building the hard pack earth and runway for our C130 Hercules
cargo plants.
We could hear their engines roar across the base and it was a wonderful sound because
it meant supplies were coming in.
As I started an Anderson's team was already there and it was a great surprise to see
them again.
Dude, they've got showers here.
Everybody instantly got excited.
We had spent the past 23 days living in dirt and filth, sweating profusely under
a thick mop suits.
My hair had been matted down by wearing my Kevlar helmet and it was a thick greasy
layer of sand stuck to my scalp.
I think that I had sanded in every orifice of my body and as I looked upon that beautiful
shower tent, she beat me back into me to enter.
I was happy to oblige.
I felt human again.
This is after you get out of the shower.
I smelled civilized.
I felt like a brand new man.
There was also going to be hot chalice served that night.
The first time that we'd received any since we left Booganville and I absolutely couldn't
wait.
So you get to LSA, Chestie and you kind of settle in and then this happens.
I was awoken by a serious hushed conversation just outside the STP, which is the shock trauma
platoon surgical tent door and I heard someone lifting up the camo netting to make her
way into our sleeping area.
Staff Sergeant Anderson, a whisper rang out among the sound of crickets and generators
not so far away.
After a short whisper discussion, staff Sergeant Anderson said, absolutely, man, we can
help.
Emma, get on your feet.
We heardly walked down into an open field to pre-stage ourselves in the darkness and in a
few minutes the unmistakable sound of an incoming helicopter grew louder.
Out of the dark, Iraqi night flickering lights were flipped on as a CH53 C-Stalian,
C-Stalian descended into a churning cloud of dusk.
With a lowering of the ramp, the crew chief signaled for us to advance.
We charged forward into the hot turbine exhaust and deafening noise into one huddled mass.
Taking the beating sand against our skin to quickly move up the tail ramp.
A green light illuminated the back of the helicopters we ran up.
The helicopter crew in the back pointed to several occupied litters that held the severely
wounded, clad and bloody bandages and it was a very sobering scene.
Each of us grabbed an end of the litter very carefully and carried them down the ramp and
away from the helo as their ponchos on top of them violently snapped back and forth against
the gusts of the still spinning blades.
We made our way up to the small incline toward the open tent door of the STP.
And inside of fluorescent world doctors were preparing their hands with red iodine
streets running down their arms.
I heard the marine who we were carrying mumble something and I couldn't make it out.
Stay strong marine.
We have U-D-S-T-P buddy.
You're going to be alright.
I gave him words of encouragement though I had no idea what his prognosis was but the
more I looked at his bloody bandages.
The more I was getting a sinking feeling in the pit of my belly that he might not survive
the night.
We crashed through the doorway and put our wounded guys onto the litter stands but the rear
doors were sealed and the only way to get out was the way we came in.
So we stood there trapped as the other wounded servicemen were still being carried in
and we got a small glints into the world of another kind of hero.
The nurses and doctors of the STP immediately assumed their duties and started to cut
the uniforms off the casualties and throw them into a bloody pile on the floor.
Start intervenes lines and start to speak loudly to the patients trying to get their attention.
And of those four that you brought in three of those did not survive and that was where
I started the podcast today was reading that excerpt of you and your team seeing dead American
servicemen for the first time.
And again, you know, this is just that opening of you seeing this for the first time and
you closed now by saying it was a tough night for the first time I'd ever seen to see servicemen
as much as I had prepared myself mentally and physically for the job I'd never prepared myself
emotionally.
I kept thinking about those guys.
The scenes kept playing over and over again in my head.
And that's 23 days into it and something like that.
So in all those fire fights, you'd seen a bunch of dead Iraqis on the way out there,
hundreds of them, maybe thousands of them.
I went that within thousands.
Maybe 100, 100 plus on the sides of the road, but not as thousands, but death.
When we passed first part, it started passing by.
I'm like, oh, look at that guy there.
Oh, look at this burning tank over here.
But when we got to finally the 23, 24 days when we had those three guys in there, it became
real.
Even though it was real, but this whole time you prepare yourself and you don't want
to do our job.
We never want to be the ones that were busy.
And then it was the first time that we had went through and had the face that realization
that we were needed.
And the guys that we were bringing in, you can connect to these people because they're
weren't the same uniform as you.
There's to have the same ones.
They want to go and do the best job they can and go home to their families.
And then all of a sudden what made me start to feel guilty is that I knew that they were dead.
I could see the pictures of their family members that they carried with them.
I see all that their family members don't know that this guy that was gone.
Especially when you see pictures of their children and it really kicks you square in the
teeth.
So, yeah, that night it just made us realize that we were in a job that was really important,
but you had to be tough in a totally different way, a way that we haven't prepared ourselves
before.
So, yeah, it's an interesting turn of events or the way that it washes out because that
happens and then pretty shortly thereafter you guys get told, oh yeah, that you're going
home.
So you covered that here.
We were notified that M182 was to rotate back to Kuwait because the other companies that
we trained back in Georgia and watching in DC in January needed to get some experience
before the war was to end.
And that left us a little raw.
We started this war four weeks prior watching the very first rounds impact by both air
and ground campaigns.
We transverse back and forth across this country supporting whichever unit was expecting
enemy contact.
And now we were being pulled out of the conflict before we could get across the goal line
in Baghdad.
And this is another just interesting perspective of war at the time.
Here's someone, you know, some senior person back there is going, you know what, this war is
going to be over pretty quick.
We better get some other people experience.
And by the way, this is April 13th, 2003.
This war had another decade, almost, I guess, and what is another seven years of fighting,
thousands of American casualties.
But that just shows you, you know, we looked at the first Gulf War.
It's over in 72 hours, you know, where the strongest military in the world.
We need to get some other people some experience.
These guys have had some cool.
We'll rotate them out.
You say, now we are climbing aboard a C130 on a one-way ticket out of combat.
And we felt as if, and I felt as if we had been cheated.
And then this aircraft that you get aboard for whatever reason, it takes you to Oman,
which is like the straight-up rear echelon.
Yeah.
And as you guys pull into this rear echelon command and get off, you say this, airman
who are lifting weights just stopped.
Females and t-shirts and shorts who are playing volleyball just stopped.
And people who looked as if they were heading somewhere in a hurry just stopped and whispered
among themselves as we passed.
I guess they were not used to seeing marine straight from the front lines in all our filthy
glory, even though we had taken showers just a couple days before our weird suntans from
wearing our helmets, our dirty, rack-coon faces, our sweat and fused camis, and four weeks
without fresh haircuts made us really stand out.
But to us, I guess they stood out too.
After four weeks of combat, where death was so common that had no longer passed in conversation.
We changed enough to know that the normal world would never be normal again.
It was as if this trip to Oman was a lucky windfall.
Are we had a rare opportunity to look through the looking glass of a magical mirror?
And in the reflection we could see ourselves when we were so innocent and naive, not so long
ago by days.
But forever ago, by our experiences.
Yeah, that's a serious contrast.
Yeah.
We were there at Camp Tresty.
The guy sitting at the white table, he was supposed to be the air, traffic controller,
said, that's the bird you need.
Here's your number.
Get on.
We got on, started taking off, it's supposed to be 45 minutes flight, about two hours
into it.
We were like, where are the hell are we going?
We weren't the only ones.
We had CBS News crew and a Navy Chief Master's, or Navy, you know.
So, yeah, E9.
So we got on there, spent about six or eight hours on the ground over there.
And this is another funny story.
So it's the first time I was able to call home, that called my dad.
So it was in a phone trailer.
I'm sitting back and I was like, Dad, man, this was so crazy out there that I saw this.
I saw that.
I was here when this happened and yeah, I watched the very first bombs happen and stuff.
And my dad was always glued to the TV, especially with anything was going on.
And I knew he was how you had it watching.
And so I'm telling all these stories and I sit back in the chair and stretch and I look
down in this, nobody was talking on their phones.
Everybody was glued to what I was saying.
So you had these 20 people watching me and they're like, oh my God, look at the, wow, that's
crazy.
But yeah, huge contrast between our services and their position, they're rolled as for us.
And you end up, you get back to co-ed eventually.
And then we finally left co-ed late May.
We returned home to our heroes.
Welcome back and date in Ohio and early June.
I returned to my job at the post office to find that my fellow carriers were excited to
shake my hand and welcome me back and I genuinely felt appreciated.
That's it.
As my buddy, Johnny once said when we were in my first deployment, he goes, dude, you will
get ready to go home.
He said, dude, you know tomorrow we're going to get on an aluminum tube and we're going
to wake up and be back and send ya go dude.
That's awesome.
We say November and again, jumping ahead a little bit in November, the unit called looking
for any non-military police volunteers to help fill holes on the roster for the military
police deployment.
We're going to put all of us M.A. Marines quickly volunteers since we were pretty much
non-school trained MPs anyways.
And again, they say, well, no, maybe we don't need you and then you course volunteer again
and then finally you get, they say, we're going to take you.
Yeah.
We're going to take you for a MTT.
Military training.
Mobile training team.
Our role was supposed to be to impart Western style policing to the Iraqi police who
were rumored not to do too much beyond sitting there and collecting the bribes, drinking
tea, accurate service.
Yep.
So, well, and let's just say also, if you weren't there, Iraqi police, there was also a decent
chance that you were going to get murdered and your whole family was too.
So it wasn't the only people that were doing it were, well, it was a hard job in that
perspective and then there wasn't a lot of positive reasons to go out on patrol.
That's the other thing is don't think of Iraqi police as a crime stopper.
These guys were supposed to fight the insurgency inside their own country.
So it's what we needed to do is build their security in their country and one of the
ways to do that was by strengthening the Iraqi police.
So you were doing these mobile training teams to get these guys up to speed, but it was
a tough job.
Right.
Um, yeah, but you get to call to go and then ever since I got the phone call on Monday,
I had a really bad feeling about this whole deployment.
Something just wasn't right.
I couldn't tell what it was.
And then March 1, 2004, the 19-day shy of a year since I first crossed into the breach.
In the many months of my absence, the constant conflict could change these highways into vast
expanses of nervous tension and the balance of favor into the hands of the lawless.
So again, Americans, most Americans myself included.
We thought the war is going to be over quick and now all of a sudden we're year into it.
And it's not getting better.
It's starting to get worse.
When is this in May of 2004?
March of 2004?
Yeah.
So I was in Baghdad when you were going, um, and you were heading up to Hadeetha.
I'm not a fact.
I might have done an opt to up in Hadeetha.
It was a nasty telling man.
Yeah.
We came up to Hadeetha one time.
We drove up there from Baghdad and did an opt.
And I'm trying to think of when it was, if you guys were there or not.
But regardless, as you guys are driving up there, it's, uh, the same roads that last year
were chock full of smiling and waving civilians were now filled with IED Blast Craters
and splintered shrapnel.
Gunny Sergeant Ballantine, Corporal Friceler, Friceler, Friceler, Lance Corporal,
Measure Sack, Measure, um, his name is, uh, Major Sack.
Major Sack.
Yeah.
It's, it's built like Major Kack.
But it's, Major Sack.
I'm going to give these guys Nick names for me.
Sergeant Uppem.
Yeah.
And I were designated to be military police mobile training team.
Now what's weird about this is this is, this is,
uh, zero to do with MA, to do zero.
You're with mortuary affairs.
You're going on a combat deployment now, right?
To be, and by the way, when you do these mobile training teams, you're not just training
them.
What you have to do is you have to go on patrol.
You have to show them how it's done.
This is a dangerous, dangerous job.
Uh, continue on.
I was going to take us three days to drive up from the Udari range and Kuwait to the
Ditha Dam.
You drove that, yep.
What's the case in West?
Where'd you stop?
Did you stop?
I stopped in Baghdad.
That was our first stop.
And that was like a little, uh, uh, a, uh, a refueling place with huge gigantic concrete barriers.
There are probably four or five stories tall and a really small area.
And we stayed the night there and, uh, different story.
But I met a, a corporal who was with a, um, with a, with a, with a, uh, L.A.V.
And it was like, man, I've never seen these things up close.
I want to check it out and stuff.
I got called to go to a meeting and later on, um, you know, he was already racked out.
So I missed my opportunity.
But if, if, if it turns out that, uh, I found out later on just recently that he passed
away, uh, within a lot of a month or two.
And in, in one of my, uh, talks that I gave my book presentation down in Kentucky, his wife
was there.
So, show me a picture and I didn't have the heart to tell her that I, I met him.
There at that.
But we stayed there at that refueling area.
And then we drove all the way out to Alessad, spitting night at Alessad.
And then from there, we went out to the vehicles that you have with her.
Wow.
I can't even tell.
So it was a problem.
It was a bunch.
I was with third of a time, fourth Marines, weapons company.
God.
So we were all moving in.
We were out at, and we were taking over for the third ACR for the Army.
You go here from overpassed overpassed and everything in between my 240 Gulf Sponon circles.
My anxiety was thick trying to anticipate the enemies move before it happened.
I don't know what the, well, the, the, the fact was the enemy would use bridges to like
set up IEDs to ambush you.
And so every bridge was like a, like a threat.
And actually I just talked about Johnny talking about the aluminum tube.
Well that was another thing.
Every time because he would ride my vehicle.
And every time we'd, we'd coming up to a bridge.
Jolly be in the back going, here it comes.
Shocker, you ready for your cons, bro.
This is it.
And he could make this weird noise like with his mouth like a loud, clicking noise.
Like, but it was really loud.
And if you got to be loud to you to be able to hear it in Humvee and with one headphone
on some listen to radio, got a radio going and he'd be, you know, and then we'd get through
it and he'd go, got lucky on that one.
And then you know, four minutes later you're going under another bridge and Johnny's going,
oh, this one doesn't look good, bro.
And Jolly, you ready to get some, here it comes, bro.
And then, and we drive through.
So because they use it, man, the bridge going under bridges gave you a definite, yes, a definite
special.
And you guys have armored, um, bridges, our armored homies?
We did not.
I mean, everybody else, when they, basically, the data that we were all stacked up
ready to go, they just came over with a palette and said, have that.
And they, all these guys sort of grabbing everything, bolting them onto their weapons, on
my own to their vehicles.
And I was just cleaning my weapon and then they were like, hey, we've got a couple of pieces
left over here.
You want it?
Mine is well not even taken.
It's just like a, maybe a half a door or something.
So basically we just sat there on armored vehicle and I was on the upgun.
I was on the 240, almost the entire trip.
I'd tell you, going under those bridges, I was always looking up.
I was expecting to see a 90s sitting right there to blow down.
And when you people got people up top or cars parked off in the distance somewhere, oh, man,
bad feeling, bad feeling.
Just sat there and just gritted teeth.
Yeah, hopefully you just, hopefully you don't, they're not accurate.
Yeah.
We're gonna strap on the day or night.
Ah, day.
See, we, during that first one, we'd only travel, we'll
pretty much as much as we could travel at night.
We travel super fast, totally blacked out on knots.
So when we got ambushed a couple times, it would they always catch the tail end of
us because it wouldn't be effective because we would be through it.
Yeah, you know.
But having that many vehicles during the daytime.
Yeah.
We actually broke down in Felicia.
Oh, that's fun.
Right there on the highway, no shit, man.
Because I'd ever heard of Adiza.
No, we were down in Kuwait.
And there were everybody was talking about Felicia.
They had Felicia's the nasty town man.
You know, that's the where the big ball games at, you know.
So I only knew back then, Felicia.
So we finally get there in Felicia.
On there, right there on the highway and one in the Humvees, bring it on.
And I'm on the upgun and we punch out of security.
I got the radio up in my chin strap and I'm circling right, I'm seeing people run around
us on the building setting up on us.
And I'm calling it up.
Like sit, rip over, sit, rip over.
You know, nobody's saying anything.
I'm like, what's going on?
And we finally, after seeing like forever and the lieutenant gets on, it goes, it's okay.
When we punched out our security, before we hooked up to tow bars, somebody punched
in, tripped over a wire, he reached over and cut it.
And it was an IED that was five feet from his damn door.
Yeah.
That was very, very, very lucky.
But we hooked up two bars and we were finally got back on the road and scary situation,
but narrowly, itverted because nobody at that time, every convoy was getting hit.
And we were one of the very few that didn't get hit.
We were expecting death and destruction on that.
First of all, freaking, road warrior shit.
We say here that geography of the Western province of Alambar was very different from the
scenery that I had already known in Iraq for my last trip.
No longer we see the vast flat emptiness of the sand seas that held sporadic, a tolls
of green life and small-engine communities.
Here we're rolling hills that contain the bustling population centers of Flusia, Habaniah
hit and Al Ramadi.
All extremely dangerous cities in the spring of 2004.
Intelligence reports indicated that al Qaeda fighters were being funneled in through the
Syrian border town of Al Qaeda and followed down the ancient spice trade routes now paved
into a highway that US forces designated as MSR Michigan.
Kidnapping's executions, assassinations and torture were commonplace in the back alleyways
of most any towns along the route resembling the layers of an onion.
It was several wars in case when the larger conflict.
We now found ourselves struggling to keep the peace and order among sworn enemies from
factions that held no loyalties but to themselves.
There only common enemy was us which they fervently attacked whenever given the appropriate
opportunity.
So this is, yeah, this is Alambar.
Yeah, lovely Alambar problems.
You finally get up there.
We had driven to the base of the dam and I was taken aback by the enormity of this
mega structure.
Yeah, that dam is freaking huge.
It looks like something other James Bond flick.
Yeah.
It's crazy.
It's awesome.
It looks like you could imagine there's a rocket in there or something, you know, some
evil guy carrying a ball.
You know, you little cat.
It's a...
Mesh drum beckles where.
You know what I'm looking at?
You go for a little bit here.
I took in this rounding landscape and joined a cool light wind and looked at the two towns
of dam village and Hadith in the distance.
That was where the enemy was hiding and that was where he felt comfortable.
Because we had control over the dam and the dam was such a prominent structure and you're
looking down at everything.
It's got a great high visibility.
Fast forward a little bit.
A high pitch whistling sound coming from the outside caught my attention.
What's that I asked myself?
Get inside, get inside, scream the weapons company marines that I had just hung out
with on the patio.
Twenty guys piled on top of one of their pushing each other to get out of the way through
a double set of doors.
Caboon, caboon, splash, splash.
The lights flickered, dust shook off the ceiling and the concussion resonated within
my chest and we more to rounds fell out of the sky and impacted the compound area, some
being overshot and impacting the lake behind us.
We were inside the biggest bunker on this side of Iraq so I felt safe hanging outside
my room.
Naturally our attention was focused on all those marines that ran in.
Is everybody okay?
Someone asked.
The consensus was equal across the board.
No one was hurt.
It took just a few minutes until the ward was spread that we were going to get up in a few
hours earlier than what we expected in the morning.
The bad guys just sent the challenge of red rover, red rover send the marines over.
We are going out in force before first light and the marines of weapons company, third
battalion, fourth marines were chomping at the bit to answer the call and I was happy
to go out with them.
So you're going out on your first patrol.
How many days have you been at the dam before your first patrol was it just like a couple
days?
I was just a couple days.
They're with a pit of curtable coy.
He had a very aggressive policy.
You know, he wanted to make everybody know in the area that we were in town so that we
were doing that.
Here we come.
First patrol with a hand signal our darkened figures emerged from the mist like ghosts
upon the land to move as one, changing the pattern of the formation to have every weapon
barrel cover every angle around us, trust in no one or no thing outside this circle of
men.
Question every step, every loose piece of trash, every bump in the sand or anything
that looked like it didn't belong.
We were heading directly in the harm's way and every inch of our trek could be paved
with bad intentions.
IEDs could take any shape and be left out here, waiting patiently to take life for
limb.
That was, you guys, you guys do your first patrol and again, by the book because you give
really good detail, you explain what it feels like in a way that I was reading it going
up.
Yep, that's it right there.
So you do a great job with that.
I'm going to fast forward a little bit and I think this is your next patrol.
Lieutenant Dancerraise Desarm as to signal a patrol to advance forward.
It was time to step off and do this thing.
I clip my radio handset into the train strap on my helmet so I could free both hands and
still monitor the radio tucked the antenna strut into the straps that lined the front of
my flat vest to keep my radio low profile.
Stuck the butt of my rifle into my pocket of my shoulder and put my game face on because
it was time to do work.
Like the gears of a finely tuned machine, each command was quickly followed by precise movements,
all the while each individual expertly adjusted his own tactics to fit his own threats.
If a window or street corner posed as to endanger the team, it was quickly recognized,
communicated and then covered by one or more rifle barrels.
Three-four had a proud history from the earliest days of the Pacific Campaign in World
War II throughout the Vietnam War and to the fall of Baghdad almost one year ago.
When you talk about the tent of McCoy, three-four strive to be the hardest infantry battalion
in the Marine Corps.
It's just no easy feat.
You guys are continuing on this patrol.
There was a small gray car that turned down our street and started to drive toward us.
No one attempted to stop it and have it turn around away from our formation to just keep
coming closer and closer until it broke the integrity of our patrol, what the fuck?
One of this was a car bump.
It would most definitely wipe out most of us, I said to myself, the car drove down to the
road until it was close enough for me to touch literally.
The man had a gray and purple long sleeve shirt that had stripes that went across the arm
similar to a rugby shirt.
I looked quickly inside to see if I could spot any weapons and waived it with my left hand.
He waived it me with his left, never turning his head to look at me.
I turned to step away and he extended his first finger to touch the dashboard.
Kaboom.
Within a fraction of a nanosecond, I felt a sudden and massive overpressure that made my
eyeballs want to pop inside the sockets.
The air in my lungs sucked out and a torn of dirt rushed past my head and then blackness.
I never heard a blast, I just felt it.
What the?
I lay there.
My body numb and tingling.
I slow to accept my senses and cognition.
I open my eyes and at first the light seemed to hurt and then the focus waved in.
Through the high pitched whining in my ears, indecisurable shouts were coming from my left
behind me that I noticed a taste in my mouth of blood and I had a burning inside my chest
as if I'd been the quarterback with a shitty offensive line and had the ever loving shit
stopped out of me.
So, I was so sloggically, my head started to release from the days to fog and my thoughts were starting
to once again form and regain clarity.
I looked around and noticed that I wasn't where I was just a second before, where the
hell am I asked?
I'd found myself face down at a ditch, a dozen yards away from the road and my heavy pack
which contained the radio and extra gear had slid up my back, now rested on the base
of my head driving my skull into the mud.
What the fuck happened?
What was that explosion?
Did the car blow up?
Why am I not dead?
Or am I?
I spit out the dirt my mouth and looked up to my right and saw that I was at the bottom of a hill
at the top of the hill was an outdoor goat market with a bunch of merchants who were
grabbing goats and throwing them into their cars to get out of the ensuing crossfire.
Oh shit, where the fuck is my rifle?
Marines have been taught from the very first days of boot camp that you never lose your
fucking weapon ever.
For a second I acted like that awkward first battalion recruit on Paris Island that I was
even 11 years before.
I almost shit myself and panic.
Okay there it is, thank God.
Then like a flash of lightning, the sun realization hit me and fear gripped my heart.
I was at the bottom of the ditch with no place to hide and no cover.
They were going to start shooting any second.
If I wanted to live, I had to get out of here and I needed to get out of here fast.
I started to crawl up the hill toward the elevated road, bearing my feet into the loose
dirt to gain traction.
It seemed like the harder I tried to call out, the further I slid back into my hole.
My muscles ate, my lungs still burned and I was already exhausted before the fight had
even begun.
Suck it the fuck up Chris, suck it up and push on, get out.
I had to stay low, I wanted to stay low.
If they were going to start shooting, I needed to not be a target.
I crawled up to the crest and found that there was no other place to hide up here either.
But I rejoid my fellow Marines in that game he comfort.
I totally expected to see the burning wreckage of an exploded car, but when I surfaced
out of the ditch, there was none.
It must have blown up and threw itself off the road.
I said to myself, it was pure chaos.
Marines were running around trying to regain control of the situation and the civilians
were desperately trying to get out of the way.
Where the fuck is it?
I screamed while prone on the side of the road.
Where is what?
Someone yelled back.
The fucking car I said, what fucking car?
The fucking car that blew up.
I retorted.
I don't know.
It was the fucking telephone that blew up.
It was an IED.
I heard someone to my right screaming in the middle of the formation.
I saw a Marine who was lying on his back and kind of circling in a circle, kicking in a
circle and grabbing at his arm.
I'm hit.
I'll fuck.
I'll tell a Marine who was quickly walking over to him with his arms outstretched, a
grabman, hold him down.
I could hear a couple more people to my left yell out that they were also hit.
There were people all around screaming, a blood curling yell, corpsman up, corpsman up.
I lay there watching the tumult surround me as if I were the access point of a fucked-up
war movie and everything just kept revolving around me.
I was still days but everything still still imprinted upon my mind and high definition.
Like the turning gears of that finely tuned machine that I had mentioned earlier,
each Marine or small group of Marines moved at their own quick pace for finding
cover, helping the wounded.
Coming up the road to pass orders, setting up fields of fire and preparing themselves
for a fight.
They moved without orders.
It was automatic.
These guys were so rehearsed that their default went straight to kill mode.
I was highly impressed.
The shock of the blast alone should have jangled some nerves and delivered a hiccup into
their plans but these men were true professionals.
I then felt something hot pouring down the inside of my left calf.
I reached down to touch it in my hand brought back a large amount of blood.
I had no idea where it was coming from.
My whole body was numb from the blast but it just kept pouring out from somewhere.
An overwhelming feeling of dread hit me in the fall of my mortality stirred within me
for a quick second.
Then the fear from my fellow wounded Marines survival of this situation said in and I hope
that no one was critically injured.
I thought if there was more Marines hit like this than we are fucked.
The bad guy should have been shooting by now.
How in the hell are we getting it out of here?
I shouted oh shit.
I'm hit too.
Lance Corporal Nion Nion.
Lance Corporal Nion, my three four Marine who was qualified as a combat lifesaver came running
over and yelled out I got him.
I got him.
He proceeded to pat me down looking for wounds.
He asked where are you hit.
I replied I think it's my leg.
How bad is it?
He cut my pant leg from the boot all the way up to my belt line looking for the wound.
You're okay sergeant.
It's really not that bad but don't look at it.
He looked over his shoulder.
Carmen up.
Then he looked back at me.
You have a huge hole in your leg but you'll live.
Well I three former Marines salute.
Yeah.
I was very lucky to have been assigned to them.
Those guys are definitely professional.
How much interact interoperability training had you done with them prior to going on
this deployment?
Nothing.
So you showed up and went on deployment with it really.
I got the phone call.
Good night.
On Monday when I was delivering mail.
I said to them all right I'm going.
All right there right pick up your orders on Tuesday.
We're leaving on Wednesday.
Pick up your gear Thursday and early early in the night like two, three o'clock in
the morning on Friday.
It's more picking up our weapons and we're getting on the plane.
It was that one two three go.
So the whole time when we got stuck with three, four it was language classes, meeting some
critical guys who was going to be in our team.
So rehearsing and then we're punching north and it was literally one two three.
We're now in Hadetha.
From going from Springfield, Ohio to delivering junk mail in February of 2004 to walking
the streets of Hadetha and getting blown up.
Just to great you know again the book is great in this section here.
When you're talking about like you anticipate once you get blown up you're waiting to
get the gun fight because that's what the enemy, that's kind of standard operating procedure
for the enemy.
They hit you with an ID while there's that chaos and confusion.
They hit you with small arms fire with some kind of an ambush and that's what you were
waiting for.
And fortunately it didn't happen because we were on an elevated dirt road surrounded
and once you surrounded but we were in a horseshoe of all these buildings around us.
There's no reason why they shouldn't have been lighteners up.
They would have had us.
But they didn't shoot and thank God they didn't because we had our QRF that was out
in the desert and two Humvees, three Humvees maybe but it was a light patrol and the
closest help was hours away.
What was it that it was an ID?
It was an ID.
On a phone pole it was a base of the phone pole.
I tell the phone pole.
I remember walking up and seeing this trash.
It was a little clucky.
We were walking this area was nothing but a dump and with a road but everything in the
airhole area had sand that was on it.
Dust and it looked like it's been there for a while except for the base of this phone
pole.
But I'm the new guy to this unit.
I'm thinking what are they doing?
That doesn't look right but I'm like okay we're these guys know what they're doing.
I'm going to keep on growing.
I thought my attention was them letting that car go in there and I'm thinking there's only
18 guys in my patrol.
If that thing is a car bomb we're all dead.
So I'm saying all right, row with it.
Go up check out the vehicle and then I wave that the guy boom.
I thought it went off.
When I got blown up my entire body went numb.
I didn't feel anything.
When I said that I didn't know if I was dead I was looking at my arms and legs.
Seeing if they were still attached.
I had no idea what was going on.
So the guy who came in he said he touched the dashboard.
He touched the dashboard.
What was that to activate or I don't know.
My guess is totally unrelated.
Something it was because he was at the wrong place at the wrong time.
When I yelled out at hey, where's he at?
Everybody's like what are you talking about?
The freaking car that just passed us.
My entire team, minus one, who was still back at the dam, all this were hit.
The only person that wasn't hit was at the time gunny balanctine.
He ended up retiring at Sergeant Major Balanctine.
But he was about to walk over to my side of the road who was waiting for that car to pass
by.
And that IED that car stopped all that that flag from hitting him.
But years later, and the book is already out.
I'm giving these presentations.
He sends me a picture of a part of a radio.
He says hey bus, you know what this is?
I'm like now what's going on.
What is that?
Because it's part of your freaking radio that you got blowing off your back and embedded
in my flat jacket across the street from here.
So yeah, he's got that little trophy.
But yeah, my handset, cut, cut, and two.
My antenna was gone.
Yeah, you go into that here.
You go lucky.
And again, skipping a little bit, but a whole-king figure dragging his leg definitely
resembling the movements of a zombie was making his way up the road.
It was the friendly Ukrainian born navy corpsman that I had spoken to a few times.
We had planned to get together.
He was going to teach me how to speak Russian in our downtime.
And I was looking forward to it.
But now the back of his uniform was a solid dirty plum from all the blood lost because
he had received very painful, shrapnel wounds to the back of both arms, both legs, neck
and buttocks.
And he was still dragging himself down the street to get to me as if he had just stepped
out of a John Wayne movie.
Lieutenant yelled, Doc, hey, Doc, don't worry about him.
We'll get him.
He just raised his hand and dismissed the notion as if he had turned down a drink at
the bar.
And his cool ass Ukrainian accent, he just said, no, no, I can get him.
He reached into his bag and pulled down a thick field dressing and began to read the
directions.
And you do a pretty funny little section in there about him.
Reading the directions that he's supposed to be treating you.
I was like, what the fuck, Doc, just put the damn thing on.
I'm bleeding all over the place.
I'm going to make sure I get this right.
Major protrusy, is that right?
protrusy.
Major protrusy solely approached me and asked, hey, hey, Marine, are you okay?
Yes, sir.
I'm just really fucking pissed off right now.
They blew us up, ripped my trousers, I'm bleeding all over the fucking place.
And I've been trying to raise Kilo company.
My radio doesn't seem to work.
I think that I think that I got it shut off when I tumbled down into the ditch.
Can you check it for me, sir?
He agreed and I turned around so you could open my pack and check out the radio.
He didn't even have to open the pack.
He said, well, Marine, here's your problem.
He grabbed the cord to my handset that was in my chin strap, which was now frayed and caught
away from the radio by the blast, threw it over my shoulder and said, you're antennae is
gone too.
And you have a bunch of large metal debris embedded and sticking out of your pack.
You're all full lucky, Marine.
It was the understatement of the year.
The major was right.
I was lucky as hell.
I should have been decapitated because my antennae and handset were gone and they just
and they rested just mere fractions of an inch away from my head on both sides of my neck.
If I didn't have the radio, I might have been gourd by the large metal debris sticking
out of my pack.
And if I had not moved it, that exact second that I did.
And my leg was one more fraction of an inch over to the left.
I would have had it blown off or the pieces of shrapnel could have hit me in the formural
artery possibly causing me to bleed out.
I think at that exact moment, I was among the luckiest people on the planet.
I had possessed the winning golden lottery ticket for the rest of my life.
So yeah, the major was right.
I was lucky, I guess.
Yeah.
And it up, look like an ice cream scoop was pulled out of my calf.
Outside of my calf.
Still have a piece of shrapnel right next to my femoral artery on the same leg from
there which super lucky didn't go any deeper.
But as big as that blast was, very, very fortunate to be here.
The guys in the ass ended the patrol said that it blew up more than out.
So the difference was, is that they buried it too deep.
If it was 2005, I wouldn't be here.
But 2004, you know, these are still trying to figure out how to use these against this.
So yeah.
Back to the book, it took probably took just a few minutes, but it really felt like hours
had passed.
The QRF Humvees quickly rolled down the road and the brake squealed to a stop.
They get you to like the battlefield treatment center.
The medical staff was highly rehearsed at taming the confusion and staying focused.
They darted around each other, grabbing medical supplies, filling out paperwork and rendering
first aid to each of us wounded guys.
Like a dance of highly choreographed medical professionals, their battle was to ease the
suffering of the maimed and sustain the heartbeats of those who needed critical care.
They were honorable and gallant guardians of life, slapping away the hands of death daily.
They won most battles, but lost some.
For those who tirelessly heal the wounds of broken warriors and for those who selflessly
dedicate themselves in pursuit of easing pain of suffering, I will always be honored to be
in the presence of such nobility.
Again, to hold new respect for medical being on those deployments and seeing what these guys
actually do and more.
You know, because in peace time, you're like, oh, okay, you're going to get to hang out
at Docs Place and who needs more IVs and that kind of stuff.
These guys, and you see them in doing their jobs there, it's awe-inspiring to see how they
can be as calm and level headed when chaos is just right during their table.
Yeah, and as I said, opening this thing up, I mean, their face and death all the time,
and they can't save everybody.
So there, and there's got to be some level of guilt every time you can't save someone.
It's like, that's got to chip away at you.
Yeah, totally heroic, totally heroic are our military medical personnel.
And luckily they're there.
They get you guys extracted and you say we floated away.
We floated on high among the angels inside a rotary winged war course known as the UH60
Black Hawk Medevac helicopter.
My war was over and I was regretfully delighted.
My guilt was that I was leaving my fellow Marines behind to continue the fighting as I was
going home.
I knew it wasn't the case, but I had an unbearable feeling that I was abandoning them
in the middle of a fight against insurmountable odds.
I wanted to be there alongside them.
I wanted to bear their burdens.
I wanted to fight in their fight and I wanted to share in their misery because they were
my Marine brothers and they were in harm's way.
I wasn't eager to die.
I was just eager to serve alongside my brethren when the chips were down and it was time
to prove our metal.
You make it to welcome to the Baghdad Combat Support Hospital.
But we all called the cash.
You can relax now, Marine.
You're safe.
We're going to take good care of you.
You get a nice smooth, relatively smooth extraction.
Then a little bit fast forward a little bit.
Sitting in the spotlight of a humming fluorescent bulb, I dialed the phone and the connection
led to failure.
I dialed the phone again.
Again, failed.
On the third try, she answered.
We both had been accustomed to carrying out our phone conversations at an accelerated
pace.
It always been limited to just a few minutes and now without missing a beach, she continued
our dialogue from the past several days.
I just let her speak.
It was good to hear her submit the woes of life a million miles away.
That life seemed so foreign to my reality and I longed for it once again.
I reluctantly informed her of the events the day.
Life seemed to stop and the phone nearly hit the ground.
My words caught.
The midnight breeze evaporated into the night sky and a world-way away, they manifested
and struck like daggers in her heart.
For me this day was done.
For her, I imagined a day filled with anxiety and angst.
The father of her child, her husband, was wounded and unsure of his day's ahead.
I promised myself, from this day on, I would never take life for granted.
From that day forward, I never did.
Colin Holmes.
How long did it take to heal up?
What in that long?
I stayed over at 29 p.m. for maybe five, six months.
It wasn't that long.
I got my skin graft done.
I spent most of my time just sitting there hanging out with the guys.
There was not even a wound of worry, regiment at that time.
They just basically said, oh, you're wounded.
Well, here's your barracks and here's a bag full of toiletries.
That's it.
Just purport in every Thursday.
Keep a run clean.
And so the rest of the time, we were just sitting around and drinking and all it, and I
didn't know anybody at 20 o'clock.
Everybody was deployed then.
Where was your wife?
My wife was at home.
You know, in Ohio.
So I was there with a can of comet and cleaning my floors, making them white, drinking a
six pack.
Well, I'm glad we have the wounded warrior now.
But things, but after I came back from my convulessantly, as soon as I came back, the barracks
was over flooded with guys.
Because I came, when I was on my convulessantly, that's when vigilant resolve happened.
The first push in to Felicia.
And the guys that I was with, three, four was with them, two, along with 37 and 27.
I believe.
And that's when I heard came back, this one we heard about Jason Dunham.
Everybody was talking about Jason Dunham.
Once you were healed up, was it back to your reserve status?
I went back to my reserve status, went back to delivering mail.
And then that's when they were saying, hey, we're thinking about going back over this time
back to more jewelry fairs.
And I put my hand up, said, absolutely.
If my guys are going, I'm going to be there next to you know.
At that point, I was one of the most combat experience guys for the more true fairs.
So I'm, I mean, I shoot, I was just right there.
So I knew more of the lay of the land and how they're fighting.
And so I figured if we gather the outside of the wire, I could impart some things that I
know that might help them.
And I know that I had a bad feeling about this whole appointment as well.
Did, did, did they give you any kind of choice where they like, hey, look man, you just got
wounded.
Your back was a, it's a mission critical on the list.
They are happy to take anybody who puts their hand up.
So you got guys who, I was one of the most senior guys in the semelus.
I was in it since 1993 when it first came in the unit.
So for years of not being utilized and trained, you know, properly to all of a sudden,
we're at the forefront at recovering guys.
And we were handling remains almost every day.
Going and making stuff up on the fly because there was no, there was nothing to guide
this.
When you raised your hand to volunteer, what was your wife's reaction at this point?
She wasn't happy, but she understood that she married a Marine.
And my heart is with them.
My heart will, you know, if she was to give me an ultimatum that I would take that, I would
say I'm going.
I'm going to say it by because I needed to be with my guys.
I needed to be in that fight.
So she understood that from the very onset of our relationship.
And not to say I didn't love my family, but my heart was over there.
And if I didn't go and something was to happen, and then she knew that, even though
I wouldn't have, but she didn't want to be put in a place where I would have but
blamed her.
So it was easier to let me go over.
And plus I didn't like delivering mail until you say truth.
I loved being in and making a difference somewhere because anybody can deliver mail.
Because when we show up to the next day, you're still going to have a mountain of mail
to deliver.
But over there, I felt like we were making a difference that we were doing things that
were important.
And my lessons that I was given to the troops and shown them how to patrol, how to, you
know, how we do things in certain situations.
It mattered.
And I was grooming and mentoring leaders to take my role.
Because I knew I was going to be in its forever.
And now, no, the mission was still going to continue.
So I said, yeah, send me back over.
It's America right there.
And your wife being supportive.
That's America.
So you guys end up going to teach you what we all call teach you, out to get them air
base.
And you say, here, I was crazy to volunteer for this again.
This being my third trip in there in three years.
I knew that I was putting a lot of strain upon my family back home, but the real world,
no longer made sense to me anymore.
Here in combat, I felt alive.
Here in this ugly world filled with all its lethalities and bloody ends, all this made sense
to me.
The rules were very simple.
Do your best at your job and do your best to stay alive.
Yeah, there's a, there is absolutely a simplicity in combat where nothing else matters,
right?
Now I was back to be the Paltoon Commander for our Mortuary Affairs Detachment and TQ.
You check in and here we go.
This is you kind of getting your first visual on what you guys are going to be doing.
The double doors were held open and suddenly it became very sobering moment to watch the
formary and scary in a litter with a large black vinyl bag on top.
There was no mistaking what it was.
All of us were here for the explicit purpose of taking care of those who were inside
of them the best way we possibly could, not a whisper was uttered, not a sound was made
before the remains were lowered to the litter stands and the processing team was ready
to begin their work.
We stood out of their way, paying particular attention to the reactions of our Marines,
shadowing their team to see if they could stomach this kind of work.
This was the second day of our change over.
We were just there to observe their Marines and ensure that our Marines were asking all
the pertinent questions to assure a smooth transition for the transfer of authority.
So far they were doing just fine.
Just fine.
I noticed it immediately and after contemplation I liked the reasoning behind the idea.
Their major explained that remains were no longer called remains.
Rather they called them angels.
That simple change in the lingo encompassed how we felt about the fallen and altered
how others outside our tight circle viewed them as well.
Now the official reporting in radio traffic had changed and instead of calling out that
we had KIAs inbound over the radio it was changed to angel flights or three inbound angels
on the next yellow.
It was respectful to those who lost their lives and those units who lost that member of their
team and I think that it truly helped those of us who did this kind of work to cope with
the after effects.
A US Army staff sergeants stood in the back of our small crowd of staff and officers
kept to himself and watched the Marines on the process in the room floor work.
It was easy to see that the realization and not fully settled in yet and through his
classy expression of exhaustion he thanked us for taking care of his major to which we
applied.
We are so very sorry for your loss.
They had both belonged to the same US Army Reserve Unit in Grand Rapids, Michigan and
had both been out here out there for a few months, Shive a year.
They both were out together on the desert roads this morning inspecting the many IED
craters for repairs trying to earn the trust of the Iraqi people and deny al-Qaeda insurgents
places to hide their bombs.
Everyone in their unit unit knew that their job in Iraq was extremely dangerous but they
still did it without complaint.
Just like the hundreds of times before they had walked up to the crater to inspect it for
repair before they could commit any of their vehicles and this morning all seemed normal
but with an a clap of thunder he watched his major disappear into a cloud of dust and sand.
Now at the end of a long and terrible day he was tasked with escorting the remains of his
brother-in-law home to his sister's family who at this moment didn't know what had happened yet.
We all felt terribly sorry for their loss and sacrifice.
It was time for us to pay our respects to a fallen brother.
We all gathered around the angels flagged draped transfer case both units and the staff sergeant.
The chaplain stood at the field of blue and white stars and began with the Bible verse
John 1513.
There is no greater love than to lay down one's life for one's friends.
It is within these holy words that our minds were left to wander to try and make sense
out of the terrible tragedy that lay before us.
The chaplain continued and I reflected upon the words that he chose.
This major was a courageous man in service to our country, a man who loved our country so much
that he was willing to risk death to protect it.
This morning his dedication had been realized by giving his life for those he loved.
That's 24 or 48 hours after you guys get on the ground pretty much.
This is 2005 August, summertime 2005.
That was right outside of Ramani it's really, really nasty area.
Little did I know when I got assigned to that place that was the busiest area.
That was just one among many, many stories that I was like that almost every day.
It's interesting because you are in the reserves and here you are.
You have gone in three deployments, you have already been wounded.
It was the 228 iron soldiers out of Pennsylvania.
That was the brigade that was there in their national guard unit and they suffered massive
casualties because they were in Ramani when I arrived there and they were just doing incredible
incredible job taking the fight to the enemy and they paid the price.
We say this, we were only three days deep into this deployment and I already could see
the contrast between this deployment and OIF1.
This time around we were to learn much more about the angels than what was comfortable.
Each was to have his or her own distinct story explained by the personal effects that
he or she carried.
The brother and arms, the brothers and arms who went for them as they dropped them off
and the stories of valor in which the angel met his fate.
There was within these events that the paradox of a mortuary of fairs marine in theater
rests.
Do we keep the angel disassociated as much as possible to minimize the after effects of
such work?
Or do we embrace the angel's stories honoring their sacrifice and revealing our true feelings
of empathy to those unit members present?
Present.
No matter which path we were to take, it wasn't hard to see that this deployment was going
to be an extremely long and difficult one.
With how dangerous Alambar province was, it looked as if we were going to be extremely busy
for this deployment.
You guys take over, you have a conversation with your gunny.
Gunny ski said, did you happen to see all those wrinkles and creases on the angels' flags
from a couple weeks back?
He nodded his head, yeah, while I'm aiming to change that.
So you noticed that the flags that were being put on the caskets were, they were taking
them straight out of a cardboard box and placed them on to the transfer cases and tied
out a white cord around it.
It was not anybody's fault.
It was just the way it's been always been done.
When I was with three four, I had found out that a bunch of guys that I had met had gotten
killed in Felicia.
One in particular was First Lieutenant Oscar Jimenez.
I didn't really know him, he decided to him chewing me out.
Once I had no idea he was a lieutenant, he was walking around without his blouse on.
Then we got called to a meeting.
I was trying to get in, he was trying to get out.
He told me to be the gangway, you're the hell are you.
I found out who he was.
When I was on Combo Lesson, the day I left, they come back to 29 palms.
I noticed that the USA today had a mural of everybody who got killed and his picture was
pretty much dead center on that.
I noticed a lot of faces that for the people I knew.
Particularly with him because he was wearing his dress blues in that picture.
That was a pretty much a big kick to the stomach to know so many people that was on that
page.
Going forward, now I was in charge of the very building that their remains went through.
I had a connection to that sacrifice because I knew several guys who went through.
I kind of hurt to think that if that is the flag that gets handed to the families, it needs
to be treated with the utmost respect.
It needs to be treated as something that is befitting of a hero because they sacrificed
their lives for us, their rest of us, not only that sacrifice, but I wanted to honor the
sacrifice that their families were sent to make because it is them that continue to live
without that family member.
These flags is not just another piece of cloth that it is something that is handed down
from generation to generation to generation.
It is something that people put up on their mantels.
It needs to be treated with the utmost respect.
So after I saw what had happened with that U.S. Army major, I started going down to the P.X.
I bought one can of starch and I bought their only iron and only iron in board.
You are not supposed to use starch and combat.
We are trying to look good for the enemy.
I took it back.
Next day there is two cans.
Next day there is four cans.
It is kept on doubling up and one day the lady said, hey, what are you doing with all the
starch?
You are here at the same time, it was every day.
I said, man, I am iron and I am searching every American flag before we put them on the
transfer cases.
We even came up with our own fold because before the flag was in danger of touching the
ground.
I wanted to treat them with the utmost respect.
We tied the white cord first, tucked it down on the sides and then it was out of the way
for the honor guard and it stood at state and eventually got adopted by all the branches.
That became the standard operating procedure.
We would iron it so much that when you walked around it, it would gleam in the light.
Back in 2009, I am back in Ohio and I get a phone call from staff, and he is there
in DC and he goes, hey, bus.
Brigadier General, so-and-so was there at Ramstein and he is watching a Ramps ceremony and
his entourage and the first one comes off and it is done the old style.
The second one comes off and it is done the old style.
He goes, damn it, I know Marines did that.
I am going to find out who and am going to find out.
Let them know what it means to me and my entourage.
He called up chief Warren for IITIS in DC and she said, yes sir, we called the bus one method.
Bus started that back in 2005.
We adopted it.
We now made it that everybody that we handle in the Marines handle, we do it this way.
It was from now on until the end of the Marine Corps when the country no longer needs a
Marine Corps, we are going to do it this way.
Anybody gets killed in combat or dies overseas, they are going to come home this way.
It was adopted.
First it was the Army and then the Navy and now the Air Force.
If you watch the guys get unloaded from Benghazi, that is my ceremony.
That is my flag.
The guys from Ramps ceremonies nowadays, it is done that way.
The guys come and home from North Korea being repatriated from Tarawa.
It is done that way.
It was my little 15 minutes of fame, my little thing that I did.
I never got to add a boy at it or anything like that.
But I didn't do it for that.
I did it because that needed to be done.
I needed to be, these guys needed to be honored.
The best way we could bestow upon them because they are heroes.
If you see sacrifice every day, as we did, the ultimate sacrifice every day and it really
sticks with you.
So I am glad that I had my little hand at that.
That is what I will live on with those guys.
As you mentioned earlier, talking about going out and setting up security and recovering
from on-scene, this is not a job where you are always in a safe and secure area to conduct
your procedures.
At one point, you get called out to Ramadi to help recover remains from a Bradley fighting
vehicle.
You arrive on scene there and I am going to go to the book on scene.
They are lay a sickening black smudge of charred butchery of a burned out M2A2 Bradley
fighting vehicle.
It stole my breath.
It broke my heart and my soul earned another shade of hate to know that there were five
men trapped in there when it was blown up by an ID inside the city.
Out of those five, there were still three soldiers unaccounted for, buried among that twisted,
burned mess of steel and wire.
This was the reason why we were flown out here to camp Ramadi to recover the remains
of these three fallen heroes and return them home with honor.
The Bradley was placed upon a low flat bed trailer and transported there to the Pennsylvania
National Guard's compound.
And again, you do a really good job detailing how this unfolded.
But to get into some of it, you say there is a process to such complicated manners and
approach to methodically separate the angels from ruin and to make sense out of such a horrific
carnage.
One section, one bucket and one shovel full of debris at a time.
This was painstaking work requiring us to dig by hand, sort through the debris with a homemade
sifter and capture and document each tiny piece of human remains or personal effects
found.
It was going to take a little time, the right tools and a whole bunch of luck to find the
right pieces of these guys that still had enough DNA material that was usable to positively
identify them.
Our approach had to be rude in science and we had to treat this as a crime scene because
in the end it was.
Our job was to capture every article of personal effects and every particle of human tissue
that was humanly possible.
We were to create a topographical map of the recovery site to document their locations
inside the burned out Bradley so that anyone who read my report even years later could
see the exact layout of how we found it.
The difficult thing was that there was nothing recognizable left to document.
The Bradley had been literally blown apart from the floor up and when the lightweight aluminum
composite armor melted in on top of itself.
You described that here a little bit fueled by magnetic temperatures, the fire melted
metal like wax.
In the interior thousands of metal tear drop shaped pools lined the wreckage.
Their sharp pointed ends greeted us like hungry daggers.
The Bradley fighting vehicles mortal wound, a blast opening several feet wide, cross the
left side under carrots just behind the driver seat.
Malton metal escaped through the wide, crevoss and quickly cooled into a very thick layered
puddle of shiny alloy metal beneath the Bradley.
Springs ejected from magazine splintered metal components and mangled weapon barrels protruded
from the slag as if a river of wreckage were frozen in time.
Mass casings from a multitude of calibers littered the floor covering the back of the
troop compartment from a few inches to greater.
The ammunition boxes or magazines that once held them had burst open and were punctured
from the inside out.
Fire ravaged junks and boxes had been ripped from their homes and now lay in the tango.
Their conduit and wires hanging limp and frayed.
The smell was an overpowering bokeh of burned electronics, missed with a slight ashy smell
of an all-consuming inferno.
This fire was so intense that it turned everything into a light, wispy dust.
In the troop compartment, the thick conduit and wires that stretched throughout the scene
were pulled back and cut.
The metal junction boxes were inspected and stacked among the refuse pile.
The thick blanket made of twisted debris and top grayish ash was slowly pulled back one bucket
of time only to reveal the grim story of the two warriors that were found in the rear
of this Bradley.
These two angels were documented on the site sketch as R1 and R2.
So this is, I talk about this many times.
This vehicle graveyard that existed in the body of, I was probably 75 to 100 vehicles
easy and just every one of them in various states of destruction and when you bypass that
in it for whatever reason they put that vehicle graveyard on the road.
I mean I guess they did it because it was a simple place.
You get back in the compound, you take a left and there's the vehicle graveyard.
But just kind of FYI every time anyone rolled out the gate, the last thing they saw was
that vehicle graveyard.
And there's no possible way you could be sitting in a Humvee or a Bradley or an Abrams
and go by that vehicle graveyard with 100 destroyed burned out vehicles in there and not
think to yourself, okay, could be the day.
You guys are doing a ton of work to rip this thing apart all by hand with sledchammers.
We had never seen anything like this ever.
As far as I knew nobody had ever seen anything like it before.
Nobody has ever shared that with us.
So we're looking at this stuff, a melted vehicle.
World War II manuals, you're talking about all steel vehicles.
You can blow those up, it's a pieces.
But this is felt totally casing, things, people.
And we literally were swinging and breaking things with a sledchamer and they made, they fabricated
tools for us to go out there and try to pry the layers apart.
And we literally took what was left and made them into separated men and depiles.
And there had to have been millions of pieces, millions of pieces that we went through.
Nobody ever prepared us for that.
And it's taking you days.
Yes.
And this hard labor, prying this thing apart.
And then you go to this point here.
Slowly the layers of melted metal into a brief gateway and revealed its secrets.
The heavily damaged remains of one US Army soldier inside the tight confines of where the
turret turret would normally have been was a char torso lying on his back.
Semi embedded into the once viscous metal floor.
His right shoulder and right upper arm reached out toward the hole where we were able
to recover his forearm up to the elbow the prior day.
Just inches above the torso buried deep in the amygdala.
Was the back half of a human skull minus any fragments or facial or lower mandible bones.
Only the interior fossa down the posterior cranial fossa were present.
Just a few inches away from that also deeply buried with a remnants of one burned Kevlar
helmet.
The atmosphere was electric but then quickly turned into a somber tone we had found our
three.
So this was just kind of a different kind of mission for you guys because it was your first
time picking apart a scene like that than the helicopter.
You know, we had never seen anything else like it before.
Most of the recoveries are going to be where similar situations but most of the remains
that we would handle were coming to us.
Only if the unit was engaged and couldn't break away or the scene was too catastrophic
they would send us out.
This was a scene that they had no idea how to determine what was what and I was expecting
okay well I can't you guys recover you know when you're telling us over the phone and
when we showed up it was at you totally understood from what a gigantic armor personnel
carrier to all of a sudden being you know maybe chest high.
The thing that is is high as it's it's tracks everything else was gone.
Well you guys and there was the gunner and the driver or the gunner and the VC had been
thrown from the vehicle and recovered it was the driver and the VC and then he had two
guys in the back.
We were still looking you know we did the driver the VC two guys in the back we're
still looking for the gunner and we had no idea because when we first got the word we were
looking for three we're looking for three remains so we fly out there we find three remains.
What you're looking for and which which counts you as an angel is not your head or your arms
it's your your torso so we find the remnants of three torso and
we go back and two weeks later we get a phone call that none of the DNA is matching
up to their gunner and we're like that's impossible out of all those millions of
remains pieces fragments there's nothing coming back for your gunner so we go
out there again and there's looking again break it apart further nothing we and we
go out there maybe a total four or five times and five weeks later they ended up
finding the person and at the very end of this long mystery it turned out that
what we thought was R3 was actually a part of a guy that the recovery on the
scene when they did initial explosion they said that his front half blew up but
his back half fell back in and got encased in metal so we were both right that
they treated the one out there as a torso as an angel and we did too and what
had happened to the gunner was the ID breached right behind where he sat and when the
vehicle melted it carried the bones out underneath the vehicle and it got in
case under 12 inches of slag metal underneath the vehicle and it's first time
we've ever ever seen anything like that you know we hit that piece
sledge hammers try to break it and stuff and it wouldn't come apart but you
know with logic looking a square in a face to say hey we found three we
were breaking you know we can't find any more remains and so what had happened was
they decided that we were going to send this the rest of this vehicle back to
the states and look through it by a mass spectrometer and try to find any
any voice and when they were lifting it up the bottom piece that all the
run off when they lifted that up it broke in pieces and all the bones were falling
yeah but I remember you know right before I was the called the end of the
initial recovery and I didn't feel right about it and I kept on feeling like I
needed to be drawn to this blast hole even though logically they looked for
three I found three that kind of thing but I felt like it wasn't finished and
after the five weeks of recovery you know I think back at maybe it was his
spirit letting me know that here this is where I am don't quit don't quit you
know now but I know it's not my fault or anything but I still blame myself
you know for putting his family through you know five weeks of hell just just
because you know I should have listened to my my gut feeling but you know that's
this things that we take away from it but yeah you know I didn't go into too
much detail but he actually got reported as missing in action at some point
which was like the second missing in action yeah so it was like you said it's a
nightmare it is a nightmare being on my hand and I'm thinking all of the
things that could have happened like did his remains get ejected or we waiting
for a video to show up with a captured set of remains were they gonna booby
trap his remains and for us to go out there and find him and try to get more
of us are they gonna ransom it you know what are they gonna do and and this all
these different scenarios are popping up and and all of them were viable but
we had no idea it's like he just disappeared you know nobody ever thought
that a person could literally melt through a vehicle and what we were looking
at it crazy crazy you guys and again this just kind of goes to the nature
of the war that was happening in Alambar province and in Ramadhi you guys go
back to Ramadhi again to get another blown up Bradley and you say here and
this one you actually go on scene right you say here few few laden earth and
oily ash made dark smudges upon my uniform as the distinct pungent smell of
the still smoldering M2A2 Bradley fighting vehicle lingered heavy in the air it's
complexities of varying distinctive stenches ranged from burn wires burned
diesel fuel burned ammunition and the heavy greasy smell of burned people
my team and I had been now been up for nearly 30 hours straight and I was
miles beyond exhaustion from the nearly continuous pumping of adrenaline
through my system and this is because you're on senior in your in the field
in your body what had happened was is that we've they've got word that an incident
happened so they were playing this all right we're gonna bring it the vehicle back
to to uh... ticket we're not we're now they kept on going back and forth and
and so my team is ready to do a they know for just like how we did in
Ramadhi the other one for them to bring the vehicle to us on a low boy and for
us to work so we were up the whole night prior working on other remains and
you know getting those guys going home then all of a sudden
we're standing a team up we're gonna go out and then we're like okay we are
going out after many many hours of this back and forth
so we were exhausted you know thirty plus hours of being awake
and we show up to the scene and we show up to this you know
another incident that claims to have and why did they send you guys into the field to
do the recovery because that are putting it on like how they had to
bring it back they tried they were putting it on an at a 88 but they had
seven guys and the scene was too catastrophic they got hit right next to a big
open field that had like wheat or something growing on it so they were
afraid that remains were out there or they didn't know if we're in
Ramadhi's were under it and plus when they have that much fire in this
vehicle and the tool missiles are going off in the back of it and it's melting
that regular you know people can't tell what is what so what they think is
a piece of plastic silicon could actually be built and so they wanted people who
were experienced to know what what is what and be able to capture everything that we
could and but that scene was literally catastrophic it was the biggest
idea creator I've ever seen you say here I was shaking from the cold shaking
from the declining adrenaline shaking from the over consumption of coffee
and shaking from the terrible fear of my impending death my stomach turned
a nervous caffeine laden reflux up my digestive track that only pride kept down
I'd taken too many chances in my tours over here I'd overplayed too many hands
and this was my last of nine lives this was Ramadhi the devil's playground
luck as a shelf life and mine was set to expire my only two hopes were that when the end
came it would come fast and my body would be viewable so my family at home could have the luxury
of closure each breath I took felt borrowed and every check of my watch brought disbelief
that we had lived a few more minutes longer
you get a little you get a little briefing from the army captain we came from that direction
and we were heading in that direction toward those buildings early last night the US army
captain vehicle commander of the Bradley that transported us here said jestering with a knife
in hand this was a joint US Iraqi security security force patrol so there were five
Americans and two ISFs in there the vehicle commander was ejected when it happened so we already
have him recovered he was a good man what a fucking shame he pointed down the road that
led off into the indistinguishable unknown of the delicate mist be careful the security team walked
in that area a couple hours ago and the insurgents tried to get them by blowing up another big
ID down that way those guys got lucky and nobody got hurt so don't have any of your guys go down
there and stay off the sides of the road we don't know what's in that area the ID creator was the
biggest I had ever seen taking up the entire road and it was just as deep as it was wide the Bradley
suffered such a catastrophic blow that it was in several pieces the heavy diesel engine was ejected
it's turret now lying 40 yards away and upside down and there was a whole several feet wide in
the center of the chassis the vehicle was held together only by half of the frame the EOD professional
slowly let solely yet cautiously work their way towards the smoldering mechanical carcass deliberately
picking up the unexploded rounds along the way the rounds were meticulously collected
and set into a pile of short distance from the Bradley my SNR team ready the body bags as I
began to wonder if we brought enough of them for all the pieces of these poor guys
the vehicle was actually going this way and the ID went off and it ended up going that way
it was pointed in the total opposite direction of the way it was traveling
the turret was popped off of it and it was open the I mean literally you can walk in from one end to
the other end with your arm straight out and not touch a thing it was totally wide open just like
the other one was and you know and there was remains you know pretty much everywhere it was just
a bad scene
it might have taken maybe 30 minutes before EOD was done we had to start counting the remains so
that we had all seven accounted for sergeant Kinley, Corporal Thomas and I began to search
the incident site while each of us counted out loud cautiously crawling into the Bradley
barely able to distinguish human remains from the charred remains of the tankled mess of burn
wires and jagged metal the vehicle commander is already recovered so that makes one there's the
driver he makes two a few seconds went by there's three four and five a few more moments went by
and six I think yeah that makes six we walked around looking for number seven and he was nowhere to be
found again you fast forwarding a bit you guys continue to search and then finally I think I see
a heel of a boot under those wires there hey Kinley come here and check it out can you see what I'm
pointing at I said he leaned over and pulled some wires out of the way being go I think we've got
him we found number seven hey Thomas helped me out here
shit he stuck 20 minutes passed slowly 20 long minutes of watching the exhausted
ebs and flows of tattered emotions of the faces of those present trapped in a ripped
tide of fatigue on certain gen discussed I knew him he was my friend the M88 tank
record operator confided in me as the boom of the colossal machine easily lifted the
turd into the air freeing the trapped angel my guys quickly freed him from the wires and began to
carry him away he didn't deserve to die this way this is fucking terrible I took my eyes off the scene and
looked at him the tank record operator tears had tears streaming down his face and he looked over
to me and shook my hand thank you thank you for everything that you and you guys you and your
guys are doing to bring him home really thank you for everything you're doing for all these guys
you guys come all the way out here and risk your lives to get my buddies out I cannot thank you enough
for doing this it really means a lot and then kaboon ground shook my heart stopped the ripples of
concussive shockwave went through my innards uncomfortably tickling my stomach in my anxiety
shot through the roof everyone got down and took cover behind anything the conservatives protection
the tank record operator still kept walking on the open road back towards the record
not at all influenced by the explosion his mind was struck by grief the blast might as well
been a cool breeze and he looked as if he didn't care there was another ied that blew up on the
tail end of the perimeter no one got hurt just a little shaken no one could relax but how could we
every inch of this road could be wired to blow so you guys wrap up that you guys finally have
everyone and now well there's a situation that unfolds here's the problem staff sergeant we only
brought enough vehicles to transport my security team out of here we were already out here at the
scene last night and nobody at higher headquarters told us that they were going to fly you guys
all the way out here to join us how we didn't even know that you guys what that you guys were
even going to be here until you showed up at camp correct or we just do not have enough room
to take the remains and all of you back to base we need to figure out a way to do that we can't
make two trips so basically you're all out there you got the remains now and there's not enough
room in the vehicles to get everyone in the vehicles back to camp correct or right and eventually
you guys come up with a plan yeah they wanted to put the remains on top of the vehicles
and and I shot that down and I wasn't going to give the satisfaction to the bad guys to
let them use that as a recruiting tool that you know they just missed up these guys and I didn't
want them to know how how bad they hurt these guys so I said no no we're not doing it we know we'll
find another way so we chose another way and then another way well you explained it to your
guys there is no other choice brother canly and I are going to ride in this Bradley here we're just
going to have to stack all the body bags and gear on top of us this here is the shit that night
mirrors are made of and I would never ask you guys to do anything that I wouldn't do myself
the team just looked at me with wide eyes standing there and looking perplexed for a second
it was a cardinal rule to never stack the remains and always treat the fallen with the
utmost respect but the reality of the situation demanded that we do this way there clearly wasn't
any other choice in a matter we had to get them and us home canly and I climbed in come on let's
start getting these guys in here and get this shit over with the angels were stacked on top of us
from Florida ceiling and they're uncomfortable weight crushed my legs causing my feet to fall
sleep little rips of form little rips had formed in the corners of the black vinyl body bags
from the difficulty of maneuvering inside the first and now the second Bradley allowing some
of the viscocities to escape we were ready to go and I couldn't wait to get out of here
as you guys are driving back you described this we passed a couple of M1 Abrams tanks at an
intersection they were blocking traffic for us the entire way back to combat outpost
correct or was guarded by one of the most beautiful sites that I've ever seen a US Army
platoon of heavy armor taking over this side of the city ensuring our way home holy ship we just might
make it I looked over at Sergeant Kimley to tell him but he was passed out sleeping I just shook my
head and disbelief yeah there's some times that when there was a wounded guy or whatever
the well I know the two two eight would do it and I know that the ready first brigade they would do the
same thing like they would lock whatever section of the city down to ensure safety I mean you
can only do it for so long but that's what they do when there was something like this going on
and it was a very welcome sight to see because we had lost three Bradley's in three weeks
and you know and now we're taking care of those those guys and getting a moment the whole time
I'm thinking we're getting it lit up too and yeah when we saw I could look at a little periscope thing
you know the brief glass and see oh wow they're locking the city down that's awesome you know from
being all the way you know on the bottom to all of a sudden like wow we just might make it
we just might not have to be blowing up inside this vehicle yeah people might think that you
have a feeling of safety and security inside of a tank or Bradley I never felt secure inside of
a Bradley just don't get tired of it and those you know and I very seldom would ride in the Bradley
but the army soldiers were riding in there every single day I got handed to those guys and like
I said every single time they rolled out their rolling past that vehicle graveyard you know you're
not invincible so I'm gonna jump forward a bit here and again you give great detail yeah I think
you call that a mystery a second ago of unraddling that first or unraveling that first Bradley
the missing guy the MIA and you do a great job of going in those details it's a powerful story
um that you cover I wanted I knew I was maybe their family members or the members of that
unit would pick this up and would read it now I wanted to know let them to know that
what how we saw it from our end that we weren't trying to not do our jobs that we were doing
everything humanly possible to get him home and we just we're exhausted all of our means to do it
we had no idea until that very last day then then five weeks later we found him
I'm gonna fast forward a bit back to the book the door swung open and the major promptly
stood before us he had clearly been upset about something and the stress showed in his eyes and his
tense stance everyone sit down he was folding his hands into one another and his eyes never made contact
with any of us I've just gotten some bad news my mind immediately drew up a mental checklist I had
to figure out exactly what equipment in person know we needed if we had to go on another recovery
mission outside the wire but this really had to have been something truly special I'd never seen
the major so visibly shaken today this morning master sergeant angus got killed what I
mumbled under my breath he was out on a mission he said as he continued looking at the ground
and they set up a trap for him and his EOD team my worst nightmare had come true I was about to
process a friend and I was ill prepared in the hundreds of times that I'd rehearsed in my mind
I'd never thought that it would come to this but it did just a day or two before master sergeant
angus his whole EOD unit was here to celebrate Thanksgiving with us and he had stood where gate wood was
now standing chatting with me about trading some of my motel music from my computer
now the very thought of him being dead seemed surreal sergeant Clinton
Kinley and sergeant son Sean Johnson show up and I told them what to expect as per the
information that I had had had sergeant Kinley prepared the SNR packs and ensured that the
recovery team member and weapon systems were ready to go at a moment's notice sergeant Johnson
ready the processing room floor and assigned a couple Marines to iron starch and IP the flag
and preparations for angus his transfer case I called the main armory to set aside an appropriate amount
of ammunition required for recovery team heading into harm's way and then I prepared myself for
whichever scenario came first
seconds turned into minutes minutes into hours and each clock movement thunder does if it was a heavy
wood door being slammed in a vast chamber the major informers that the EOD team had recovered
his remains and was en route to our mortuary affairs collection point he advised us to prepare
ourselves this one was going to be especially messy I went back up to my loft area which
overlooked the processing room floor changed into my camis and sat down at the computer I still
had worked to do reports to write I didn't want to seem impacted by this I wanted to be the pillar
of strength for the others to look upon and be encouraged for the situation ahead but I'm sure
that my false facade was easily crumbling in front of the armlookers as I sat high in the loft
for everyone to see I was tired of this shit I took his death personally and the knowledge just
burned me up from within I just stared blankly at the computer screen the world continued to spin
and darkness crept into TQ the EOD team arrives and by teams of two the M.A. Marines quickly
grabbed each end of the body bags placed them on to litters and hurriedly moved his remains into
the processing room floor I helped grab the last bag out of the humvee and notice that it's
slashed around the bottom of the compartment which held about two inches of blood
bag was very heavy and sagged in the middle jagged bones sharpened by the blast protruded
through the bottom and a trail of blood was left into dusty driveway my heart sank
we placed him onto the litter stands which each had a thick mound of saw dust below to catch any
bodily fluids and locked the doors behind us cutting off his unit members and gathering on lookers
they did not need to see what we had to see every day
it was our burden to bear not theirs so your team gets started with the processing
and you go into checking with the major you knock on the door and he says come in
bussler I opened his door and entered the air change from the cool openness to a sweat laden
cordite smell a very familiar female EOD surgeon still wearing her ballistics vest and clearly
in shock from the sudden and devastating loss was sitting in the chair against the wall with her
shoulders hung and a heavy brow the major sat in front of her leaving over with elbows on his knees
and his hands clasped together trying awkwardly to console her
but his attempts were futile I had known her as the Marine martial arts instructor who let
all the martial arts classes for the EOD team and for the 372nd helicopter squadron
often they had invited our unit to train and those of us who accepted found that she was a true
professional and confident leader of Marines she was pure entertainment to watch in martial arts class
because of her thin short frame yet she took warriors many times her size and introduced such
searing pain that was simply best described as shutting off all brain function or a neural override
but here she was wearing the expression of absolute horror beyond any that I'd ever seen before
the major and I had to get a statement of recognition from her to aid in the tentative identification
of the master sergeant and doing this made me feel beyond terrible but she had to tell us the
story of what had happened out there between sobbs she began to relive it all over again her eyes
flickering as if she were watching a movie that only she could see then she began speaking
we were out there and found the first IED it looked like a trap from the beginning
they blew up the robot there wasn't a band in car and the master sergeant volunteered to check it out
he walked over to where I couldn't see she started crying which subsided into a whimper
she continued he walked right up and and
it's okay sergeant what happened I asked that's that's when oh god she started uncontrolled
we sobbing for a minute then through her tears she conjured up enough strength to continue to
they called corpsmen up corpsmen up and then dock ran all the way over there from the backside of
the perimeter he ran up thinking that he could save his life that he was hurt that he was still alive
we all did we didn't know how bad it was we ran up asking where is he where is he
they just pointed at all the pieces on the ground she fell back into shock
and that was all we could get but that was enough information for the statement
and then after a few minutes when she asked to leave she did by the front doors by the duty hut
the major and I walked out to the processing floor and witnessed something that to this day I
would never forget something that has haunted and will always haunt me to the end of my days
black vinyl bags of nothing but a friend's body parts
burnt torn bits of camouflage clothing and destroyed gear out of all the deaths that I had
been surrounded by and all my time over here and in all my tours never had I seen anyone in such
shape so catastrophically shattered I really think that in that long stare across the floor
which took maybe only a minute or two I instantly felt myself age in a flash I felt as if all my
youth and vigor for life had been sacked from me by one horrific scene
in those hundred twenty seconds I knew that I never wanted to devote myself to such ugly work ever
again in those hundred twenty seconds I knew that I was sick of death in all of its forms
and in those hundred twenty seconds I knew I would never ever be the same
and you know war doesn't stop and four days after Master Sergeant Angus died
going back to the book the rear door slammed as they entered interrupting the unusual quiet
and gaining the attention of all of us who called the CP home just as they did over a hundred
times the team on duty carried in one litter with a large zipped up block black body bag on top
and then gently lowered him onto the litter stance the processing was moving along I checked
the penmanship lined by line to see if it was all legible if everything was spelled correctly
and if they had used capital lettering for each entry as the regs mandated
okay his name was William D. Richardson okay he was a marine staff sergeant okay
wait a minute what oh my god did you see what unity was from
sense of dismay hit me what's up bus something wrong going to gatewood asked leaning over my
shoulder to see the paperwork that I still had in my hands I handed in the paperwork this is not
good gunny this is Sergeant Kimley's buddy who's who he was hanging out with just yesterday
he was in charge on the security detail from the S&R a couple days ago
you in the book describe you know how you kind of connect the dots and then you realize
that Kimley's not there at this time and somebody's got to go tell Kimley what had happened
he was up the whole night before with Richardson going through the draft or action reports
and we're never catching up on old days you know there was his own platoon sergeant
and yeah canley knew Doug's wife you know he knew you know it's been all this whole time
together and didn't even know that each other the two of them were on the same base and then we
were already associated with the EOD guys there are our buddies they would come over and hang out
with us we go to their place and until you know after Angus got killed and they hooked up and then
you know and once I realized who it was you know I had to I had to be the one to tell him because
if any if any of my buddies got killed over there I would want a friend to come and tell me
and not just anybody you know hey you know your your buddies did where you know I wanted to be
there for him and to be there to support him and because I knew it was going to be a huge deal
our job isn't an easy one and when you realize that your buddies are there
you know being worked on that takes it to a whole new level yeah so you you're going find them
and he was supposed to have duty he was supposed to be there on that team
that morning and since he stayed up the whole night before they just let him sleep
going back to the book I didn't I didn't know why but I could barely get the words out
I'm sorry brother I had to be the one to tell you
but we have your friend Steph Sardre Richardson at the CP
there was a home V-axe downtown this morning and I am so very sorry brother
but he didn't make it
I knew that he had heard me but it was as if his mind refused to accept it
you could see the thought roll back in his mind and a look of emptiness
soul you replaced his sleepy expression he squinted as if he was concentrating on a deep thought
then look down to put a pinch of dip into his lips stood up and said
okay Steph Sardre and he walks straight out the door on the far end of the building with a blank look
I wasn't sure how to take his reaction I looked at the gunny and he just shrugged
we waited several minutes to see if he would come back but he never did
so we turned out the light and closed the door when we left
the wind still blows the sand still shifts the stars still fill the sky
and the world continues to spin even though it may feel as if it has been shattered for your friend
you um you go into a great section here you know about gimme
and what that did to him and it's something that everybody should read and it's um
you know he had reached his limits for that deployment for that deployment he went back
to three other times afterwards and you guys had to take care of him which is what you did
right and he took care of him and you did it the right way
got him the break that he needed and this is something I talk about all the time
is just like a car if you they check engine light comes on you got it you got to get it off the
highway you got to get it serviced and if you get it serviced it'll be okay check light engine goes off
you can take that thing back on the road again if you keep driving it when that check engine light
comes on and then the temperature gauge comes on and then the oil pressure gauge comes on
and you keep driving that thing you're going to destroy that vehicle yeah
and so you guys did the right thing and as you could see he was able to get that check engine
light fixed get the refit and go back and continue on once again that's America
he's a hell the guy he was in Felicia, Phantom Fury and he worked at the potato factory there
where all the remains were coming in he did all the the search recoveries going and they're
pulling out all the dead insurgents you know and and this is when EOD could not
fulfill all their commitments and stuff so they were out there with hairpins and put them in grenades
on your own on their suicide vests to you know make them where they won't blow up and then
take care and stuff and then you know this here's his second tour of his with us I mean the guy
is one of the best and I that's that chapter is the strongest man of the youngest and he definitely was
like I said it's worth reading so that people can understand how all that unfolded
and and what you guys did what how it affected him how you guys took care of him
and and obviously the the outcome is positive I guess there's no other way to say it
because I know it's not a positive situation but the outcome is positive you know you
use able to continue on go on more deployments continue to do his job going back to the book
17 weeks at past since our arrival here to teach you and over that course of time I had watched
our mission here take a toll upon each and every one of us in the platoon our mission of processing
angels had slowly bled the color out of our lives until the one day when we woke up to find the
whole world gray there was nothing to look forward to but the slow grind of our work and the end of our
date the end date of our deployment which still seemed so far away our day to day reality here was
filled with an ever increasing level of gruesomeness with the opening of each bag just when you
thought you'd seen it all there would be one more unimaginable horror that would take your breath away
it was said that there was no tougher duty than this mission and that there was no greater honor
than more charity affairs duty but there was nothing about this mission that would be motivating
to any of us because no matter how you looked at it at the end of the day you are putting the
broken pieces of yet another American hero into another black vinyl bag to be sent home to another
family who had soon have their world shattered and with each set of remains that we sent home
a little piece of ourselves went with them
yeah I mean just a brutal deployment and when it again jump at a headwind it finally comes time
for you guys to go home you you call this chapter more than ready it felt as if all of this
had been a dream that this day truly wasn't here and I would soon wake up to find that we were
still back in September and we would have to redo this whole deployment all over again I was
miles beyond exhausted both mentally and physically the experiences of the past six months had left
me battered and defeated and when I looked deep inside myself it felt as if my soul had
withered and turned gray from being exposed to so many gruesome deaths this had been hands down
the toughest of all my deployments and now you're getting ready to actually leave and you
say I threw my sea bags down onto the gym floor that the major had bestowed the name house of pain
back in September and I had thought that his bravado was misplaced to me this whole place was
one big house of pain from up here in the loft I had watched the Marines open the black vinyl
bags of so many fallen heroes the floor of the gym had been our overflow area for a mass
casualty situation in December the front desk was where I had first met master sergeant
angus and the processing room floor was where we saw him off our storage area behind the floor
was where I witnessed the immense weight of our job crushed the strongest man among us and out
in the reaper was where I touched the blue field and white stars and set a quiet prayer for all
150 angels who left my custody this building held so many memories that had now been seared into
this reaper of pathways of my brain and I was a flurry of tangled emotions
I quietly closed the door behind me as I made my way out
shutting out the world that would forever haunt me before I climbed aboard the Humvee
are you ready to go staff sergeant to drive or ask me? I replied
more than ready brother I heard that he said and just like that we were off the chase
this on across the sky and to wake up in another world
and soon thereafter you were getting on an aluminum tube and you were back in the states
any did they have any decompression for you guys what did you what was your process coming home?
Get off the back of duty go back to your regular lives there was nothing no gradual time
you know I let them know that our first sergeant that I wasn't ready you know
and you guys I don't care by the end of the day you're off my books
so I went back to delivering mail and then I started having all these problems with PTSD
I felt like I was always on patrol my mind would click off I would still walk for blocks
wasn't sleeping everything that that I repressed over there in combat all the remains
that we had taken care of I had still dream about it and stuff and
and it took over my life I ended up leaving the post office
got rated at a hundred percent permit and told with the VA and went to a big deep depression
I ended up coping with everything by drinking seven days a week because that was the only way
I knew how to get some sleep and I got lucky because I met the a met
people who actually cared and wrote me in one of them was my PTSD therapist Bill
he was over at the VA just to retire out the air force and he was there in Iraq
with the mental health assessment teams so now finally met somebody that I didn't have to explain
when I knew he was because he traveled the same roads so he helped me through
it could be three o'clock in the morning and I could call him it didn't matter
but what really also helped me is a was a corpsman from Vietnam did two tours over in Vietnam
and over at the VAFW and when we're on night we're sitting there and we're drinking and stuff
and we used to have all these big philosophy, philosophical conversations and you go
you know what I know what you need I'm like what you need to start writing I'm like now
I'm good man I'm out of writer a barely past high school English so he goes no that is what
helped me when I was when I came back from Vietnam so period of time goes by and I ended up
picking it up and said why not oh from a nightmare and said I am not doing anything else why not
so what I did is I started writing down the stories and my very first one was Angus
I did what he said I would write it out I would say my goodbyes I would have my little toast to them
and at the very end I would burn it in a bonfire and in symbolically I gain power over that
but was a immense weight upon my shoulders now had an America value
and that experience now was worth 20,000 words and I could change things around and change the
perspectives and stuff but it gave me a chance to pull out that trauma and pull it out and instead
of being a big jumble I pulled it out and being able to diagnose it and I started writing and I would take
those stories into my therapist and years later my wife suggested why not try to publish it
and so that's what became the book it was started off as just me trying to get a handle
of all the stuff that we had went through never never ever expecting to publish it and now
it is what it is now it's the second book to have ever been written about this subject
about mortuary affairs but the first one that ever dives into the emotional side and how it hits us
and it connects generation kill to taking chance that whole blank area
there and it has opened a lot of doors for myself as far as being able to overcome what I thought
was my weakness and I found it is actually my strength my I have the answers that a lot of
families, gold star families want to know they want to know how with their son or daughter
taking care of when they lost her lives and my book stells that that they were surrounded by
the ones that they loved and who loved them and I wanted them to know that the very last
hands to touch and in our rack were carrying hands we were the ones willing to die to make sure
that they got home so yeah this book has become a lot more than just a collection of stories it's
now providing a by example a way for other guys to find peace if I was able to sit there and write
maybe somebody else can figure out that they can get their sit there and write and be able to find peace
after all of this war and multiple deployments and stuff so I'm hoping you know everything will
other people will pick up on it when you when you go to the therapist that help you what what's
that process like what are they asking you what are you telling them what are they telling you
he we would sit down and look at you say how are you doing and I would say I'm having a really
rough time having slept in three days you know every time I close my eyes I would think about
this situation and that kind of thing and fighting with the wife again and I can't connect with my
kids and I feel like that you know my kids are afraid of me and I think and then we just go off into
from there he would talk about whatever situations that would have happened he had a really good
way of easing into over there and how they connected I would have I still do have a food
version just because I don't some sometimes the food reminds me of the stuff that would happen
over there and and so we would talk about that situation and work through those and when I
first started going there was seven days a week eventually now it's way to one day whenever I need
to talk to him but I know that if I was to give him a call three of them morning he's always going to be
there and I think that's what really is is the key behind other people they need to have that
family around them of support that you know they had a wife that she never gave up on me she always
was there to to make sure I was taking my meds and make sure that I had somebody to talk to you
if I needed to talk to one of the she would call up one of the Marines a bedlack he would come over
and and I needed somebody to talk to you right thing who was there and so I think it takes more than one
person to help people get back in their minds you know and so the combination of talking about it
with therapists and friends and then writing about it getting it out and seeing it and seeing it
as what you say it was a product like something you could calculate it was 20,000,000,000 but you
took this pain and transferred it into something that had value that you could look at and then you
could understand better you articulate it right you start seeing it from a different perspective
because when you read something that you've written you see it from a different perspective now you
can understand it better better you understand it the more power you have over it right there's no
longer await and hold me down and something that would try to avoid thinking about now it's
something that I was focused on something that it wasn't that wait it was something that means
something because of this moment I was talking about angus and now I'm bringing this chapter into
to build and he would say okay let's go over what had happened and we would work on that and then
I would burn that after I was done with that story and would rewrite it all over again and it was just that
going over and over and over and over and over that same stuff but I think also what really helped
me is going on some of these veteran trips that meant me knowing connect with other people
who who may have different experiences then I did different kind of traumas but we built a little
network of people and then I finally realized I wasn't alone you know and at the very beginning
I felt that I was alone that everybody else is still deploying and here I was and I was the broken one
and I was ashamed of that and and and then after all of this years now I don't look at it I was
broken I looked at it that I was I just I was injured I you know I can't be put back together I can't
heal but you have to be patient it's not just flipping the lights and everything will be okay like I
expected it in the very beginning it's something you have to work on and so after all these years
of after I published it now I'm in I'm back in school becoming a electrical lineman something
when I thought my life was over and I'll never be you know that husband that father that man
and now I am reinventing myself and it's through you know people who love me and you know and
people that have met and they've always been there for me and and going through the book and pulling
out that jumble of experiences and pulling it out like a thread and being able to work on that
and it has really opened up my future yeah it's very very very fortunate
yeah the the idea of having a new mission it's again something that I talk about a lot and as
soon as you said you would what how did you terminate at them at the postal service did you quit
did you win so as soon as I heard that I'm like you yeah because well a you know it's like okay
at least you have to do something but if it's not something you care about then it's not in
me help anyways but you know as soon as you said I'm going back to school and become alignment I'm like yes
and you know I needed that break I needed to focus on me I looked at going to therapy as my job
my full time job and I needed to do it because I want to be the best father I can't be for my
kids how to be the best husband I can be for my life you know and I wanted to not be a sad story
I wanted to be able to get back into living again not just being trapped inside my own four walls
so through the book and through therapy and at the end of the book I'm thanking all the people
that really you know sacrifice their time because they thought I was worth it you know
when did you lose your dad 20 11 February of 2011 we would we would we would go in the work just
like how we did before the war started we would you know I would pick him up we would go in
one just days I would drive over to his place and then he would drive and he had always catch me
staring off into nothing we would meet for lunch and I wouldn't say a thing my mind was still over there
and he was always hey you know I could talk you know if you want to talk about you know I didn't
see anything that you like you saw but I'm I'm always here and so when I started writing was
after he passed about a year after he passed and I think that you need to have somebody that you're
writing to and that's what helped me get out of my shell about writing was I was writing it as if I was
writing it telling him about all the things that he wanted to know so you you you talk about that and
well it's worth closing out here you say in the end of the book for years and years I have
struggled hard with post traumatic stress and I've been through the gamut of self medication
contemplation of suicide survivors guilt sleepless nights hypervisulance flashbacks and
night tears but it was the open hearts and kindness of the strangers and friends that helped my mind
returned from the battlefield long after my body had found home it was the friendly faces of bill,
Janine and Bonnie at the VA it was the open year of my neighbor Chris it was Derek and the richy
boys in mobile Alabama and also Ray, Bobby and Tom in Jackson Hole Wyoming Chris, Brenda and Josh
up in Delta, Wisconsin Lisa with the Semper Fife Fund Bill and Dave with Operation Healing Waters,
Don and Diane and Cambridge Maryland, Mo Mike Luke Ashley with three gun four vets
Larry drawn, I'm saying that right, Larry drawn junior Larry drawn junior for teaching me
that there is no such thing as giving up even if you had lost your legs now Afghanistan
yeah my wife Wendy for always believing in me even when I gave up on myself and last but not least
my dad Larry Bustler I wish you were still here to see this day dad I still remember you
ask me what I was thinking about all those times that you caught me staring off into never never land
I told you nothing because I didn't want to talk about it and you would laugh and tell me
when you are ready to tell me I'll be here
well dad I wrote down all the stories that you wanted to know
I just wish you were still here to read them
and I also want to just
you know you you have the book dedication here
it says this book is dedicated to those who had shed their life's blood and defensive
carnation to those loved ones who went for them and to those who ensured that they were
returned home with honor
so you know as much as I
I think as much as I talk about the immense cost of war
there's really just no way to capture and describe and properly communicate the impact that war has
and I think one thing that
one thing that we have to do is we have to make sure that it's not only a negative impact
it's up to us it's up to us to ensure that those sacrifices, those
in calculable sacrifices by the fallen, by their families
we got to make sure that those sacrifices were not made in vain and we do that by living our lives
to the fullest
every second, every minute, every day, four those heroes
make your life count
this book will absolutely give you an appreciation
it gives you a glimpse into these
from it gives you a glimpse in the war, give you a glimpse into these sacrifices and as I said at the
beginning of this the sacrifices aren't they don't end on the battlefield
in many ways they start on the battlefield because the families have to carry on
and like I said this book will remind you of what you got
you got a website called notufferduty
no tufferduty.com you're on Twitter, Facebook, Twitter is no tougher duty, Facebook is no
tougher duty, no greater honor, Instagram is no underscore tougher underscore duty
come sure people are going to want to reach out to you and communicate with you and talk to you
you've been through some you know you've been an off-close and personal with a nightmare
with a nightmare
and it's not just me it's it's a whole bunch of other people who sacrifice their lives
to ensure this they dedicated their lives to this mission and I'm thank you for
allowing me to be that voice for them as well because throughout history it's always been an
unsung heroes that they dedicate their lives to make sure these guys get home
you know and thank you and the other closing thoughts I would like to thank
the 0445 club Miss Elzarka my brother Sean Busler
Paul Slade out there in South Africa you know thank you for all the support
that in reaching out and getting me out here and and keeping up with me at home and
I just like to let everybody know that you can get this book no tougher duty no greater
honor on Amazon on Kindle and also on audible as well and we'll we'll link it through and yeah
the fact that a bunch of people on Twitter a group trooper group I guess is what we're calling it
guys got together girls got together and and kind of FYI you that trooper group put together the money
for you to get out here you didn't need to do that but you did so what we're gonna do here is
donate that same amount to the Sanford Fife fund to try and help out you know marines
also around the world and thanks to the trooper group for putting that together and I know
it took a while to get out to get you find me out here everybody probably thinks I'm the worst
human being in the world when they're trying to get on the podcast or because it just there's a
lot of people there's a lot of there's a lot of people and so it's I'm you know I'm sure it doesn't
seem like a what a big deal to coordinate it all but when it's just me and echo and when there's a lot
of people on the list and we only do it once a week so I'm sorry that it took some longer to get you out here
I thank you for having me it means a lot to me to be able to sit here at this table knowing the
people who sat here before me Kyle Carpenter and general mochiama and I mean people that I've always
idolized and just find inspiration behind their stories and I'm very I'm humbly honored to sit here
I also wanted to thank my wife Wendy there's no way I could even be at this point in my life without her
and my wife and my kids born and they have a keep on striving to be a better person because of them
come a very very long way from who I was when I came home and if it wasn't for their support
who knows but I want to be a better father and a better husband for them and I thank you very much
for being a part of my life and sharing their love with me.
Well awesome you know you got to have that family support and it's awesome that your
family's there for you and you know we've been here for three and a half hours I just want to say thank
you for coming on thank you for writing this book that tells the story of you know it's not just
your story and you just point you just pointed out it's not just your story it's a story that so many people have
gone through it's a story that if you don't know it you don't know it and that's a problem
so many incredible sacrifices so thank you for coming thank you for writing the book and most of all
thanks for your service and your sacrifice and to close this out of course
separate for Dallas brother separate five and with that gunny L Christian busler
Chris Bustler has left the building and heavy very heavy subject time for a little decompression
which you're in charge of echo tross just proceed down the path of decompression for that
though all right so one of the many parts that stood out that kind of made me think about even more
was the you know when when he talked about okay he called it the bussler method right of putting the flag
you know so he would iron on right iron the flag so there's none of those those wrinkles like
the new shirt wrinkles you know that right and that makes sense because you know when like
let's say you see someone like with a new t-shirt on and they have those wrinkles it's kind of like you can
almost see like the product it's a product on him you know product it gets packaged and
shipped and it's this product it's not like part of the I don't know whatever the other
in a t-shirt scenario I don't know what the other feeling would be but it seems more like
it's deliberately costum it's foreign if it's if it's brand new it's creases it kind of looks
foreign yeah foreign to the to the human that's wearing it yeah you see me wearing a brand new
t-shirt with creases in it you're kind of like oh this is not really part of him right right
not part of exactly right it doesn't match exactly exactly right that's what I'm saying so the
so the the creased or folded creases in the flags that that have been packaged how he said
out of a box or something like that that feeling is really prevalent when you see the creases
and something it's kind of like oh yeah it's just this packaged product now that you're throwing
on this you know this very heavy and intense and special scenario you can say so that made sense
I mean a lot of sense actually and then you can kind of imagine the difference you know especially
when he was talking about the guy who saw that he saw one and he saw another one then he saw the
real one or the real deal and he was like man I need them all to be like that that makes sense to
me yeah for sure that he would think that's a huge deal you would feel it that way no it's so
it's important for sure for sure heavy very much so also yeah okay so what are we doing
improving ourselves yes fitness jiu jitsu work family those are four things I think you know that maybe
it would take a lot you have another one in there too no no you're thinking of the eight pillars
I had seven and you added one eight that's different okay have we discussed those yes no
not on here yeah what one did I add um it was essentially I forget what name we arrived at
but it was like the basically the spirituality element of it wow I gave you that yeah and what did
that mean what did that mean um like so they're all in pairs I don't think we should go too deep into it
but they're all in pairs so there's you know what let's do grounded podcast on it okay so
we'll do a grounded podcast because I'm real curious how I got to spirituality that's yeah
sort of fits perfect maybe that's not even the right word for it but it fits for what was what
did the spirituality part mean just explain that it meant did it mean doing good for other people yeah
it was along those lines because I could see you saying because I believe you you get more when you
give more right like that's kind of my uh not a secret but that's something that I know is true for me
right if I help someone it makes me I get more out of that than it helped myself yeah so it was
it's more about the getting more like to to basically improve the quality of your own being
kind of thing with whether it be giving others more or being in touch with like your temperer
and like it's basically like who you're on the inside kind of thing like well these are really
weird things from me yeah that's very strange like what I've said well I've said
the cover is on grounded yeah it goes the anyway the foot which is different that was the April is
this is just the four areas of functionality that I was focused on at one point and
may or may not be still anyway okay so there you are there's one time someone was asking me something
and I was saying well it's it's easy to simplify your life when you only care about four things
right and it was those four things and they are fitness fitness health fitness that kind of
functionality capability blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah blah
just use one of its own yes it's different okay cool work in family work and family yes okay
that's legit anyway that was my answer to the lot more to it and last what's cool is
jiu jitsu will help you with all of them right even though jiu jitsu is its own category yeah
it will also help your fitness it will help your family and it will help your work yes and technically
kind of again we could go deep into it if we allow ourselves to but they all improve the
one of the true also true what's the base of the of the our can't say pyramid because it's
got four but what's the base of the square jiu jitsu I think they rotate you know because they're
flexible they're all flexible to create this one unit if you will nonetheless you did mention
I said jitsu so when we're doing jiu jitsu what do we need a key if you're doing key if you're doing no key
need a rash cart should need a rash cart yeah I think they're good rash cart is a good
where we're gonna get that we're gonna get them from origin because origin factually has the
best keys and they happen to be made in America from the fabric all the way up to the end
product well we don't have to say we're not even product yet it's a um
and don't look at me bro come on look at me for a point you walked down the valley
but and situation how about the you know it's a catch-off that is a terrible I use it a lot
not only can you get geese and rash cart which are factually according to echelacharls
and many other people many many other people I think everybody is the best are the best you can
also get other clothes there you can get t-shirts you can get a heavyweight sweatshirt that is
legitimately heavyweight four Montana four Michigan four Maine do you need it in Southern California
probably not you can also get jeans for your legs and you can get there's two different kinds of
jeans heavyweight called the factere jeans and then there's a lightweight jeans which are called the
Delta 68 jeans so if you you know you have jeans you need jeans you might as well get the best jeans
jeans that are comfortable functional durable
and they happen to look like that that's what you're going to put something on your legs put those on
your legs yes agree also through our workouts fitness jujitsu as well we can use we can utilize
supplementation got to be good supplementation hard work clean fuel clean I was talking about
supplements and how much of a part of my life supplements are specifically every single day
I take joint warfare every single day I take krill oil every single day I have discipline
and I drink milk every day that's a lot that's a lot of daily the one a discipline I don't
necessarily drink this one every day I got to take that back because there's some days where I don't
drink discipline or take discipline go but even I don't do that I usually have some talk away T I get that
little hitter is chocolate T supplement technically no okay well third fighter organic but we got some
we got some stuff that you can put in your body on a daily basis that will make you better in
jujitsu make you better in health and fitness make you better with your family because I'll tell you what
you give your kids some warrior kid milk you're a better father yeah you're in good with them too
and work of course you get that focus from the discipline your whole life is improving
that is true which is factual you can get a bad vitamin shop by the way we just kind of
partnered with the vitamin shop so that you can get cans of discipline go without having to pay a
bunch of what's it shipping sure shipping yeah so you can check that out on all that stuff's available
origin main dot com also jokwai t as you mentioned it's a good one certified organic in the can
and available for brew what do you call them dry yeah dry I guess whatever you know the
t bags you see them same anyway that's a good one also if you want to get this book no tougher duty
no greater honor don't worry I got you go to jokwai podcast dot com on the top tab menu
says books from the episodes boom we got all the books including but not limited to this one
on that page boom click through there it'll take you down as you can get it if you ever had
anybody lie to you on the internet no never ever okay there's some people that like I think they're
meaning to be cool but they'll ask me a question after telling me something like hey listen you
all the time is there a list somewhere where you have your books and I'm always like yep
it's a jokwai podcast dot com go to books and I'm always thinking you had that really not be
paying attention for a long time if you're in the game if you don't know that I mean people just
ask me some just just questions that I get asked thousands of times yeah and they and they'll
ask it and be like but which I don't mind but if they try and front load it with the fact that they're
like hey yeah really love your podcast okay if you love the podcast then you know that I've written
kids books right you know you don't say hey you really love your podcast it'd be great if you could
do something for a kids book right yeah I mean I just yeah it just happens I don't know I guess
that's not lying maybe they're just trying to be nice I'll tell you what it is okay I'll
I'll imagine it's a spectrum I would imagine I don't know but it seems like it is where you
got some people were just blatantly like kind of lying go like hey I I love your podcast or
maybe they do love it but when they say I listen to all your podcasts and love and love it you know
like maybe that kind of thing that technically is not true because you don't listen to all the
even if you did listen to all the podcasts you're kind of misleading if you did listen to all the
podcast but you didn't listen to the whole thing of all the podcast because it's you did listen to
here's the the support kick in their shop now they're not listening here to this right now
and then maybe you know they're violating and that makes sense you know because they're like hey
podcasts over when to this support mode is listed on the things it's like boom next up but done I
get it yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah yeah you're moving on
makes sense you know what is a lot of it actually yeah so you technically miss like a what percentage
of people do you think they're done after they hear echo tell us about whatever and then you're
a lot then they're like click don't know what's for there might be in my perspective it's possible
It's for his possibilities, go.
That is pretty high.
I actually beg to differ because there's so many people that say, first of all, there's
people that have straight upset, I listen to the podcast for the supports.
Now of course, there's being a little bit sarcastic, but that's still a statement.
It's not nothing.
Right?
And then there's plenty of people that say the only advertisements that I listen to are,
you know, when you and Echo do it.
And what first of all, I say, what's not really an, is this considered an advertisement?
Yeah, you know, I mean, as far as definitions go, yeah, sure.
Maybe, I don't know.
I don't know.
Okay.
But okay.
That makes sense because I have heard that.
So I'm thinking that more people than you think.
I think people are listening right now.
About to click.
Anyway, so yes, we did, we got the book on Docopotcast for those who may not have
been on before.
Got them all listed by episode.
Also, chocolate store, it's called Jockel Store.
And this is where you can get T-shirts, rashcards, hoodies, hats, tank tops, merch, as it were.
That's representative of the path.
Disbelinicals read them.
Good.
Stand by the get some.
Get out, you know, all these victory MMA in fitness.
Victory MMA is the reason to represent school.
Oh, yeah.
Big time.
There's people that roll out deep with victory MMA in fitness t-shirts.
Oh, yeah.
I see him in Ohio.
I'm like you.
You know, represent just straight up in the game.
It's good.
But yeah, Jockel Store.com.
What about that Jockel white T-shirt?
What about it?
Is that on there?
Yeah.
Because that's how does a gop T-shirt?
That's like, it's like your deep in the school.
You know, when you were a kid and you'd see like a cereal box, it just has the thing on
it.
And you're like, dude, no creativity whatsoever.
That's the Jockel white T-shirt.
It's just the can.
It's legit.
Yeah, but those, those kinds of shirts are legit.
Like, remember the old school like Pepsi?
Yeah, because otherwise basically you're trying really hard, right?
Yeah, he made a Jockel white T-shirt design.
Right.
I don't have like a T.
Well, leave that stuff being wrong.
The creative.
He's the creative.
He's a creative.
He's what it is.
We don't know what that is.
But we know that we're not it.
Yeah.
All right.
Yes.
So yes, Jockel story.com.
Let's read Get This.
Don't forget to a speaking of this podcast, which you may or may not be listening to.
We're leaning towards not probably not listening to it anymore.
We're just fine.
If you are still listening to it, you probably have subscribed so that 1% of people that
aren't that are listening right now that still haven't subscribed, you could do that
because for some reason that's on this piece of paper that I wrote.
Yes.
And for review, which is funny, you can leave a review that serious or whatever, but
why that's not a good interaction with me.
If you say, hey, it's a good podcast.
I like the information that they put out.
This will do nothing for me, for echo, for anyone that reads it.
If you say this podcast is the only podcast that has support advertisements that are of more
value than the entire podcast itself.
If you say it's echo just laughed, I laughed a little bit, whoever reads that will be like,
oh, what does that, what that's all about?
So subscribe to the podcast and then leave a review that will entertain us.
And by us, I mean, everyone, not just us to idiots sitting here talking, but everyone
else that's listening.
That's true.
I agree with that notion.
Also grounded podcast, speaking of podcast, ground a podcast.
And apparently now we owe a grounded podcast about the four focuses of life and then the
eight pillars of justice.
Yes.
Well, they're pillars of life.
Yeah, justice.
Sure.
Yes.
So that one will, that would be what?
If there's seven out now, one losing.
Number two, cruising.
No, man.
Brother, make sense.
Okay.
Anyway, grounded podcast, got a new episode out.
We will focus on making them more consistently with no problems.
We will.
Don't forget about the warrior kid podcast.
Try making some more of those as well.
Yes.
And then with a warrior kid podcast, don't forget about the warrior kid himself, Aiden, who's
making killer soap.
Oh, yeah.
That's actually what it's called.
Have you used it?
No.
It's legit.
It's like, it's funny.
Every time I get like a, you know, one from them, part of me doesn't want to use it.
I kind of like, I'm saving one bar and now I'm going to open it and use it.
Yeah.
Once you use it, and we've got that on the website.
The Joggle store of website is where are we?
We're finalizing it.
Will we be finalized by next week?
Oh, as far as deadlines.
You know, I know you're not really.
I'm free.
She's a great.
I'm a bedline.
Finalizing now.
How about this?
Soon.
There you go.
It really boxed yourself in on that one.
Yes, I'm going to put it on Joggle store now.
Until then, Irish Oaks Ranch.com.
Get some soap and.
Stay clean.
Yes, sir.
Also have a YouTube channel for the video version of the podcast and excerpts.
Except if you don't want to listen to you three, four or five hours of a podcast and you
know, at a specific time or whatever, you listen to the excerpts.
Lesson take the lesson with you.
Share it with somebody.
Boom.
YouTube also enhance videos.
Put some music on there.
Green screen.
And.
CGI.
Sir.
Did you just learn that green screen thing?
Because it kind of seems like you just learned it.
Yeah, kind of.
All right.
Psychological warfare.
If you need a psychological.
Yeah, it.
To propel you over a obstacle, a mental obstacle, even a physical obstacle.
Hit psychological warfare.
To put that dough not down.
And then we also have flip side canvas, which is a visual representation of discipline.
That's run by Dakota Meyer.
So check that out.
If you want to hang something up on your wall.
For books, we got no tougher duty that which we just went through.
Go get it.
Chris Bustler, you just heard him.
I mean, you can see that book is literally written from the heart.
All kinds of stuff in there to learn.
I read a tiny fraction of it today.
Leader substrategy and tactics field manual.
Apparently the number one book of some kind.
Appreciate everyone getting that book.
And what I really like is the feedback for them getting from people that you're taking
what you can read and what you read in there and immediately implementing it and it's helping.
So that's great to hear.
Leadership strategy and tactical manual.
The warrior kid series one, two and three.
Get your kid on the path, Mikey in the dragons.
Get your little kid on the path.
This will need to go to freedom field manual.
Get yourself and your relatives and the people around you on the path.
Extreme ownership of the Dakota.
Leadership learn to lead, foundationally written by myself and my brother, Dave Babin.
We also have a consulting company called Eshalon Front.
What we do is go into companies, teams and organizations and solve problems.
Any problems.
I know that sounds crazy.
Any problems that you have at your team in your organization, in your business, they are
leadership problems.
And the way you solve them is by fixing, aligning and educating you and your other leaders.
So check out Eshalon Front.com.
If you want some online interactive training, then go to efonline.com and you can learn
the principles in an interactive way on the interwebs.
Don't forget about the master.
We have the master coming to Orlando, Florida.
Nick's Arizona and Dallas, Texas.
Every single event that we've done is sold out.
So if you want to come, go to extremeownership.com and register as quick as you can.
And of course, we also have ef Overwatch and EF Legion where we are taking military
leaders and putting them into civilian organizations to help civilian companies businesses
win.
So check that out.
Again, if you want to connect with Chris Pustler, you can find him online.
He's got a website, no tofferduty.com.
He's got Twitter, no tofferduty.
Facebook, no tofferduty, no greater honor.
Instagram, no underscore, tougher underscore duty.
And for echo and I, we are also on Twitter on Instagram and on L.Fish book.
I always add echo trials and I am at Jockel Willink and once again, thanks to Gunnery,
Sergeant Chris Bustler for coming on.
And of course, Chris, thanks for your service to our great nation.
And also thanks to you and your comrades in more charity affairs for taking care of our
fallen heroes.
And today, salute to all our service men and women who pay such a heavy price in so many
different ways to protect our freedom.
And to those that protect our freedom, hear at home, the police and law enforcement,
firefighters and paramedics and EMTs and dispatchers and correctional officers and border
patrol and secret service.
Thank you for what you do every single day.
And do everyone else out there?
Life is short.
It is a finite thing.
And the clock is ticking.
So what are you going to do about that?
Where are you going to go?
Who are you going to impact?
What legacy are you going to leave?
Ask yourself those questions and don't forget what those of us who have seen death
closely don't forget what we learned from that.
Our time is short.
We'll make it count.
And until next time, this is Echo and Jocco.
Thank you.